contact@emnlp2015.org
www.emnlp2015.org
ii
EMNLP 2015 gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors for their support:
Platinum
Gold
Silver
AI @ ISI DigitalGeniusArtificial Intelligence for Brands
Bronze Best Student Paper
Supporters
Institutional partners Official Airline
iii
Order print-on-demand copies from:
Curran Associates
57 Morehouse Lane
Red Hook, New York 12571 USA
Tel: +1-845-758-0400
Fax: +1-845-758-2633
curran@proceedings.com
c
©2015 The Association for Computational Linguistics
ISBN: 978-1-941643-32-7
iv
Table of Contents
Preface by the General Chair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Preface by the Program Committee Co-Chairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Organizing Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Local Organizing Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xii
Program Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xiii
Invited Speaker: Yoshua Benjo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxi
Invited Speaker: Justin Grimmer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxiii
Conference Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxv
List of Papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lix
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2603
v

Preface by the General Chair
August 25, 2015
Welcome to the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. EMNLP is
annually organized by SIGDAT, the Association for Computational Linguistics’ special interest group on
linguistic data and corpus-based approaches to NLP. This year the conference will be held on September
17–21 in the enchanting city of Lisbon, Portugal.
1
EMNLP has continued to increase in prominence as one of the most important conferences in Natural
Language Processing (NLP). This year the conference has experienced an unprecedented boost in submit-
ted papers. I believe that this reflects both the growth of the NLP field and also the health and strength of
the conference itself, with a history of many years of solid work. With this level of interest at submission
time, we are also expecting a record attendance. The conference will span a five-day period this year, and
it requires a growing organization structure.
Some of the features introduced in EMNLP 2014 will continue this year (e.g., tutorials, new chairs,
posters as parallel sessions, flat rates and flexibility for tutorials and workshops, etc.). We also introduce
some innovations, like a revised selection process for which talks are presented as talks versus posters.
This year I had the privilege of coordinating the conference from my General Chair position. This has
been a very instructive and enriching exercise which showed me the conference as a whole, from many
different angles. Prefaces in the proceedings invariably praise the team of organizers. This one will not
be an exception. Organizing a large conference as EMNLP requires excellent people working as a team
in multiple interrelated tasks. I have been lucky to work with an outstanding team of people, from whom
I learnt a lot. These aren’t empty words. I would like to thank each and every chair for the hard work that
made the conference a reality.
The Program Chairs, Jian Su and Chris Callison-Burch, did an excellent job at putting together a very
interesting program with over 300 papers. They had to deal with a very large number of submissions,
which exceeded even our most optimistic expectations. As a consequence, they were forced to be creative
and to find solutions on the fly to adapt to the situation. They recruited the largest ever program committee
and successfully managed a huge reviewing and decision making process under a very tight schedule. A
real gift for the general chair. They complemented the program with very interesting keynote speakers,
Yoshua Bengio and Justin Grimmer who will present exciting research topics for our community.
The EMNLP 2015 main conference is accompanied by 7 workshops and 8 tutorials during the first two
days. The Workshops Chairs, Zornitsa Kozareva and Jörg Tiedemann, and the Tutorials Chairs, Maggie
Li and Khalil Sima’an, conducted the selection processes in a joint effort with the other ACL conferences
in 2015 (NAACL and ACL-IJCNLP). This has been the standard procedure from last years. It has the
advantage of starting early, avoiding duplicated reviewing and allowing a more balanced selection among
conferences. EMNLP attracted a varied and interesting set of workshops and tutorials, which gives more
value to the conference.
Daniele Pighin and Yuval Marton were responsible for the always difficult and sometimes thankless
task of putting together the conference publications. This is a very complex effort which involves coordi-
nation with almost everyone in the team under the pressure of hard publication deadlines. Yuval is serving
in this position for a second year. Staggered two year terms for publication chairs is a new addition for
1
Conference website: http://www.emnlp2015.org
vii
EMNLP starting this year, and we hope that it will be a permanent feature. In the first year, publication
chairs will learn and do the bulk of proceedings compilation. During the second year their role will be
more advisory, instructing and helping the first-year chair. This procedure will help the transmission of
the necessary know-how from year to year. Thanks to Yuval and Daniele for accepting the challenge and
making it work wonderfully. Finally, this is the second year that EMNLP uses a mobile app for the confer-
ence program (Conference4me). The publication chairs also coordinated the integration of the app with
SoftConf, which is now smoother and more seamless.
The local organization team was led by André Martins and João Graça. They did an amazing job,
working hard and with all the complexities and subtleties of local arrangements. One of the keys for the
success was the creation of a large team of local organizers with clearly defined roles and responsibilities.
They appointed very committed people: Isabel Trancoso (Local Publicity Chair), Fernando Batista (Hand-
book Chair), Bruno Martins (Website and App Chair), Luísa Coheur (Student Volunteer Coordinator), and
Helena Moniz (Local Arrangements Chair). Thanks to all. I am especially pleased about the new website,
which was revamped and looks more professional everyday. This is certainly a good investment for the
future.
A large conference as EMNLP needs to focus on dissemination activities too. Barbara Plank acted as
the international Publicity Chair. She did a fantastic job and coordinated very well with the local publicity
and the website chairs. The calls for papers, calls for participation, and main news of the conference were
timely distributed through ACL, the usual distribution lists, and also through the conference website and
two Facebook and Twitter accounts. The EMNLP2015 Twitter account garnered more followers than in
previous years.
I am really grateful to SIGDAT. Its secretary, Noah Smith, acted as the liasion between SIGDAT and
the conference organizers. He was always available and ready to help with very good advice. SIGDAT
also provided the funds for the student scholarship program. These grants help covering traveling expenses
to a dozen of students. The committee appointed for collecting the applications and making the decisions
was formed by Francisco Guzmán and Lluís Padró, who had to analyze all the information and decide the
awardees in only a few days.
Another sign of the health of EMNLP and the field in general is the interest showed by sponsors.
Thanks to the work of our sponsorship team, formed by João Graça and Hang Li, in coordination with the
ACL International Sponsorship Committee, we got a record number of 13 sponsors for EMNLP 2015 (2
platinum, 3 gold, 6 silver and 2 bronze). In addition to these direct sponsors, we also have several smaller
supporters, exhibitors, and institutional partners. We are extremely grateful to all these companies and
institutions, which make a better conference possible at a more affordable registration fee.
Additionally, we counted on the invaluable help of Priscilla Rasmussen, supporting the local organiza-
tion in all fronts with her broad experience. She took care of the registration process too. We also got very
good advice, know-how, and helpful software and forms from last year general chair and local organizers,
Alessandro Moschitti and Kareem Darwish. Thank you.
Finally, I would like to thank the authors of submitted and accepted papers, and all the attendees to the
conference, who will be the main actors from September 17 to September 21, 2015. I am convinced that
we will experience a fantastic conference, scientifically exciting and full of fond memories, in the unique
environment of Lisbon.
Lluís Màrquez
EMNLP 2015 General Chair
viii
Preface by the Program Committee Co-Chairs
August 25, 2015
Welcome to the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing! This year we
received a record number of submissions. There were 1300 valid submissions. The 600 long papers and
700 short papers were allocated to one of 15 areas. The most popular areas this year were Semantics,
Statistical Models and Machine Learning Methods, Text Mining and NLP applications, and Machine
Translation.
Reviewing for a conference this size involves an enormous volunteer effort from many individuals. We
are very grateful to our 30 area chairs and to the more than 900 researchers who reviewed the submissions.
We accepted 312 papers (157 long and 155 short papers), representing a global acceptance rate of 24%.
An additional 17 papers accepted by the TACL journal were presented at the conference as well.
To decide whether the accepted papers should be presented as talks or posters, we asked the area chairs,
the reviewers, and the authors of accepted papers to vote on which papers they would like to attend. We
showed the title of each paper and its abstract, but not its authors. 400 people provided their input. We
selected talks based on popularity, while ensuring that each area was represented by at least one session.
Our rationale for taking a vote was that papers that many people wanted to attend would be better served
by presenting a talk in a large room, while papers with more specialized interest would benefit from the
one-on-one interactions facilitated by posters. Rather than doing large plenary poster sessions, we have
scheduled two parallel poster sessions with small batches of thematically similar papers that will be run
simultaneously with the talks.
We selected best papers from a shortlist of 20 papers that were nominated by the area chairs. The best
paper committee ranked the nominees, and based on their rankings we selected the following papers for
the best paper awards:
• Best paper - Broad-coverage CCG Semantic Parsing with AMR by Yoav Artzi, Kenton Lee and
Luke Zettlemoyer.
• Best paper - Semantically Conditioned LSTM-based Natural Language Generation for Spoken Dia-
logue Systems by Tsung-Hsien Wen, Milica Gasic, Nikola Mrkši
´
c, Pei-Hao Su, David Vandyke and
Steve Young.
IBM has provided a cash scholarship for us to award to the best student paper. This will go to Tsung-
Hsien Wen, since he is currently a student. The following papers received an honorable mention for the
best paper award:
• Honorable mention for best paper - Traversing Knowledge Graphs in Vector Space by Kelvin Guu,
John Miller and Percy Liang.
• Honorable mention for best paper - Building a shared world: mapping distributional to model-
theoretic semantic spaces by Aurélie Herbelot and Eva Maria Vecchi.
• Honorable mention for best paper - Language Understanding for Text-based Games using Deep
Reinforcement Learning by Karthik Narasimhan, Tejas Kulkarni and Regina Barzilay.
• Honorable mention for best short paper - Joint Lemmatization and Morphological Tagging with
Lemming by Thomas Müller, Ryan Cotterell, Alexander Fraser and Hinrich Schütze.
ix
• Honorable mention for best short paper - Semi-Supervised Bootstrapping of Relationship Extractors
with Distributional Semantics by David S. Batista, Bruno Martins and Mário J. Silva.
This year we created a new “Best data set or resource” award, since so much work in our community is
driven by data. The paper that receiving this inaugural distinction is:
• Best data set or resource - A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference by
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts and Christopher D. Manning.
With two honorable mentions:
• Notable data set or resource - That’s So Annoying!!!: A Lexical and Frame-Semantic Embedding
Based Data Augmentation Approach to Automatic Categorization of Annoying Behaviors using
#petpeeve Tweets by William Yang Wang and Diyi Yang.
• Notable data set or resource - Modeling Reportable Events as Turning Points in Narrative by Jessica
Ouyang and Kathy McKeown.
We decided to give more awards than in past years by recognizing papers with honorable mentions and by
creating the new best data or resource award. Our goal was to recognize roughly the top 1% of all of the
submissions to the conference with awards (recognizing approximately the top 5% of accepted papers).
We are very grateful to our invited speakers Yoshua Bengio and Justin Grimmer.
Yoshua Bengio is professor of Computer Science and Operations Research at the Université de Mon-
tréal. He is the author of two books and more than 200 publications, the most cited being in the areas of
deep learning, recurrent neural networks, probabilistic learning algorithms, natural language processing
and manifold learning. He co-directs the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research’s program on deep
learning. He is on the board of NIPS. Professor Bengio’s research into deep learning has had a dramatic
impact on the field of NLP in the past few years, and has invigorated interest in AI through machine
learning.
Justin Grimmer is an associate professor of Political Science at Stanford University. His research uses
statistical methods to examine American politics. He is the author of two books on the topic “Represen-
tational Style in Congress: What Legislators Say and Why It Matters” and “The Impression of Influence:
How Legislator Communication and Government Spending Cultivate a Personal Vote.” His work has
appeared in the American Political Science Review, American Journal of Political Science, Journal of
Politics, Political Analysis, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Regulation and Gover-
nance, and Poetics. Professor Grimmer’s research points to exciting new directions for computational
social science and how the field of NLP can facilitate research in many areas.
We thank them in advance for coming to the conference and sharing their insights.
We would also like to thank our general chair Lluís Màrquez, André Martins and João Graça and
colleagues for their excellent work with the local organization, and Yuval Marton and Daniele Pighin for
doing an excellent job assembling these proceedings.
We thank SIGDAT for inviting us to serve as Program Co-Chairs of EMNLP 2015. We hope that the
conference is an excellent one. Enjoy your stay in Lisbon!
Chris Callison-Burch and Jian Su
EMNLP 2015 Program Committee Co-Chairs
x
Organizing Committee
General Chair
Lluís Màrquez, Qatar Computing Research Institute
Program Co-Chairs
Chris Callison-Burch, University of Pennsylvania
Jian Su, Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R)
Workshops Co-Chairs
Zornitsa Kozareva, Yahoo! Labs
Jörg Tiedemann, University of Helsinki
Tutorial Co-Chairs
Maggie Li, Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Khalil Sima’an, University of Amsterdam
Publication Co-Chairs
Daniele Pighin, Google Inc.
Yuval Marton, Microsoft Corp.
Publicity Chair
Barbara Plank, University of Copenhagen
Sponsorship Team
João Graça, Unbabel Inc.
Hang Li, Huawei Technologies (ISC Representative for EMNLP)
Student Scholarships Co-Chairs
Fancisco Guzmán, Qatar Computing Research Institute
Lluís Padró, Technical University of Catalonia
SIGDAT Liaison
Noah Smith, University of Washington
xi
Local Organizing Committee
Local Co-Chairs
André Martins, Priberam
João Graça, Unbabel Inc.
Local Publicity Chair
Isabel Trancoso, University of Lisbon
Handbook Chair
Fernando Batista, University Institute of Lisbon (ISCTE-IUL)
Website and App Chair
Bruno Martins, University of Lisbon
Student Volunteer Coordinator
Luísa Coheur, University of Lisbon
Local Arrangements Chair
Helena Moniz, Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores - I&D (INESC-ID)
xii
Program Committee
Program Co-Chairs
Chris Callison-Burch, University of Pennsylvania
Jian Su, Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R)
Area Chairs
Computational Psycholinguistics
Vera Demberg, Saarland University
Discourse, Dialogue, and Pragmatics
Kentaro Inui, Tohoku University
Oliver Lemon, Heriot Watt University
Information Extraction
Heng Ji, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Sebastian Riedel, University College London
Jing Jiang, Singapore Management University
Information Retrieval and Question Answering
Zhu Xiaoyan, Tsinghua University
Liu Ting, Harbin Institute of Technology
Language and Vision
Julia Hockenmaier, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign
Machine Translation and Multilinguality
Zhang Min, SooChow University
Lucia Specia, University of Sheffield
Marine Carpuat, University of Maryland
NLP for the Web and Social Media, including Computational Social Science
Alice Oh, KAIST
Brendan O’Connor, University of Massachusetts Amherst
Phonology, Morphology, and Word Segmentation
Greg Kondrak, University of Alberta
Xu Sun, Peking University
xiii
Semantics
Marco Baroni, University of Trento
Shiqi Zhao, Baidu
Percy Liang, Stanford University
Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining
Ku Lun-Wei, Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica
He Yulan, Aston University
Spoken Language Processing
Mari Ostendorf, University of Washington
Statistical Models and Machine Learning Methods
Trevor Cohn, University of Melbourne
Jordan Boyd-Graber, University of Colorado
Summarization and Generation
Meg Mitchell, Microsoft Research
Furu Wei, Microsoft Research Asia
Tagging, Chunking, Syntax and Parsing
Shay Cohen, University of Edinburgh
Yue Zhang, Singapore University of Technology and Design
Yusuke Miyao, National Institute of Informatics, Japan
Text Mining and NLP applications
Sophia Ananiadou, University of Manchester
Best Paper Award Committee
Douglas Downey, Northwestern University
Kevin Knight, University of Southern California
Qun Liu, Dublin City University
Miles Osborne, Bloomberg
Mari Ostendorf, University of Washington
Xiaojun Wan, Peking University
Janyce Weibe, University of Pittsburgh
xiv
Primary Reviewers
Balamurali A R; Omri Abend; Erman Acar; Karteek Addanki; Stergos Afantenos; Željko Agi´c; Lars
Ahrenberg; Vicent Alabau; Mohammed Alam; Nikolaos Aletras; Alexandre Allauzen; Mariana S. C.
Almeida; Yasemin Altun; Bharat Ram Ambati; Hadi Amiri; Waleed Ammar; Sophia Ananiadou; Ja-
cob Andreas; Nicholas Andrews; David Andrzejewski; Gabor Angeli; Roitberg Anna; Stephen Anthony;
Marianna Apidianaki; Ioannis Arapakis; Yuki Arase; Mihael Arcan; Yoav Artzi; Isabelle Augenstein;
Eleftherios Avramidis; AiTi Aw; Wilker Aziz; Amittai Axelrod;
Xiao Bai; JinYeong Bak; Timothy Baldwin; Kalika Bali; Miguel Ballesteros; David Bamman; Pratyush
Banerjee; Mohit Bansal; Libby Barak; Marco Baroni; Regina Barzilay; Roberto Basili; Emanuele Bas-
tianelli; Fernando Batista; Riza Theresa Batista-Navarro; Daniel Bauer; Daniel Beck; Beata Beigman
Klebanov; Núria Bel; David Belanger; Yonatan Belinkov; Islam Beltagy; Emily M. Bender; Meriem
Bendris; Fabrício Benevenuto; Kepa Bengoetxea; Jonathan Berant; Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick; Raffaella
Bernardi; Nicola Bertoldi; Steven Bethard; Klinton Bicknell; Lidong Bing; Alexandra Birch; Arianna
Bisazza; Yonatan Bisk; Alan W Black; Frédéric Blain; Eduardo Blanco; Bernd Bohnet; Gemma Boleda;
Francis Bond; Kalina Bontcheva; Georgeta Bordea; Elizabeth Boschee; Houda Bouamor; Gerlof Bouma;
Samuel R. Bowman; Jordan Boyd-Graber; S.R.K. Branavan; Jonathan Brennan; Chris Brew; Ted Briscoe;
Chris Brockett; William Bryce; Christian Buck; Razvan Bunescu; David Burkett; David Buttler; Antoine
Bordes;
José G. C. de Souza; Aoife Cahill; Chris Callison-Burch; Berkant Barla Cambazoglu; Nicola Cancedda;
Marie Candito; Hailong Cao; Cornelia Caragea; Marine Carpuat; Xavier Carreras; Ben Carterette; Fran-
cisco Casacuberta; Tommaso Caselli; Vittorio Castelli; Giuseppe Castellucci; Asli Celikyilmaz; Daniel
Cer; Mauro Cettolo; Arun Chaganty; Nathanael Chambers; Yee Seng Chan; Baobao Chang; Jonathan
Chang; Kai-Wei Chang; Ming-Wei Chang; Yin-Wen Chang; Wanxiang Che; Bin Chen; Boxing Chen;
Chen Chen; Danqi Chen; Hsin-Hsi Chen; Liwei Chen; Wenliang Chen; Yun-Nung Chen; Zhiyuan Chen;
Colin Cherry; Sean Chester; Jackie Chi Kit Cheung; David Chiang; Christian Chiarcos; Hai Leong Chieu;
Do Kook Choe; Eunsol Choi; Jinho D. Choi; Yejin Choi; Monojit Choudhury; Christos Christodoulopou-
los; Grzegorz Chrupa?a; Chenhui Chu; Tagyoung Chung; Mark Cieliebak; Stephen Clark; Ann Clifton;
Martin Cmejrek; Moreno Coco; Shay B. Cohen; Trevor Cohn; Paul Cook; Bonaventura Coppola; Greg
Coppola; Marta R. Costa-Jussà; Benoit Crabbé; Danilo Croce; Fabien Cromieres; James Cross; Montse
Cuadros; Heriberto Cuayahuitl; Lei Cui; Ronan Cummins;
Zhicheng Dou; Walter Daelemans; Daniel Dahlmeier; Van Dang; William Darling; Dipanjan Das; Pradipto
Das; Rajarshi Das; Sajib Dasgupta; Pradeep Dasigi; Steve DeNeefe; John DeNero; Judith Degen; Felice
Dell’Orletta; Vera Demberg; Dina Demner-Fushman; Pascal Denis; Michael Denkowski; Tejaswini De-
oskar; Leon Derczynski; Aliya Deri; Nina Dethlefs; Laura Dietz; Georgiana Dinu; Qing Dou; Doug
Downey; Eduard Dragut; Markus Dreyer; Gregory Druck; Lan Du; Xiangyu Duan; Kevin Duh; Nadir
Durrani; Greg Durrett; Chris Dyer; Marc Dymetman; Bharath Dandala; Adrià de Gispert; Gerard de
Melo; Ann Devitt;
Richard Eckart de Castilho; Patrick Ehlen; Carsten Eickhoff; Andreas Eisele; Jacob Eisenstein; Ismail El
Maarouf; Michael Elhadad; Micha Elsner; Tomaž Erjavec; Arash Eshghi; Cristina España-Bonet; Luis
Espinosa Anke; Miquel Esplà-Gomis;
Licheng Fang; Benamara Farah; Noura Farra; Manaal Faruqui; Benoit Favre; Anna Feldman; Minwei
Feng; Song Feng; Yang Feng; Yansong Feng; Raquel Fernandez; Daniel Fernández-González; Francis
Ferraro; Michele Filannino; Simone Filice; Denis Filimonov; Nicholas FitzGerald; Darja Fišer; Jeffrey
xv
Flanigan; Tiziano Flati; Radu Florian; John Foley; José A. R. Fonollosa; Mikel Forcada; Lluís Formiga;
Eric Fosler-Lussier; George Foster; Stefan L. Frank; Stella Frank; Markus Freitag; Lea Frermann; An-
nemarie Friedrich; Guohong Fu; Hagen Fuerstenau; Alona Fyshe;
Hongyu Guo; Michel Galley; Matthias Gallé; Michael Gamon; Kavita Ganesan; Wei Gao; Claire Gar-
dent; Dan Garrette; Milica Gasic; Jon Gauthier; Tao Ge; Spandana Gella; Kallirroi Georgila; Alborz
Geramifard; Debanjan Ghosh; Daniel Gildea; Kevin Gimpel; Filip Ginter; Roxana Girju; Koldo Go-
jenola; Yoav Goldberg; Dan Goldwasser; Zhengxian Gong; Graciela Gonzalez; Jesús González-Rubio;
Michael Wayne Goodman; Amit Goyal; Natalia Grabar; Mark Granroth-Wilding; Spence Green; Stephan
Greene; Edward Grefenstette; Cyril Grouin; Stig-Arne Grönroos; Fritz Guenther; Jiafeng Guo; Jiang
Guo; Weiwei Guo; Sonal Gupta; Iryna Gurevych; Jose Manuel Gómez; Carlos Gómez-Rodríguez;
Ben Hachey; Barry Haddow; Gholamreza Haffari; Masato Hagiwara; Dilek Hakkani-Tur; David Hall;
Keith Hall; Thierry Hamon; Bo Han; Shuguang Han; Xianpei Han; Greg Hanneman; Yu Hao; Sanda
Harabagiu; Christian Hardmeier; Saša Hasan; Chikara Hashimoto; Kazuma Hashimoto; Eva Hasler;
Jun Hatori; He He; Xiaodong He; Yifan He; Yulan He; Kenneth Heafield; Larry Heck; Carmen Heger;
Michael Heilman; James Henderson; John Henderson; Aurélie Herbelot; Karl Moritz Hermann; Felix
Hieber; Derrick Higgins; Gerold Hintz; Graeme Hirst; Hieu Hoang; Julia Hockenmaier; Yu Hong; Ales
Horak; Julian Hough; Dirk Hovy; Chun-Nan Hsu; Yuening Hu; Fei Huang; Hongzhao Huang; Liang
Huang; Minlie Huang; Ruihong Huang; Xuanjing Huang; Yi-Ting Huang; Zhongqiang Huang; Matthias
Huck; Rebecca Hwa;
Gonzalo Iglesias; Ryu Iida; Shajith Ikbal; Iustina Ilisei; Diana Inkpen; Naoya Inoue; Kentaro Inui;
Aminul Islam;
Guillaume Jacquet; Line Jakubiec-Jamet; Myungha Jang; Peter Jansen; Sujay Kumar Jauhar; Arun Ku-
mar Jayapal; Laura Jehl; Heng Ji; Yangfeng Ji; Jing Jiang; Wenbin Jiang; Peng Jin; Anders Johannsen;
Richard Johansson; Melvin Johnson Premkumar; Dan Jurafsky; David Jurgens;
Mijail Kabadjov; Nobuhiro Kaji; Nal Kalchbrenner; Justine Kao; Dimitri Kartsaklis; Saurabh Kataria;
Daisuke Kawahara; Anna Kazantseva; Simon Keizer; Frank Keller; Casey Kennington; Maxim Khalilov;
Ankur Khanna; Mitesh M. Khapra; Douwe Kiela; Halil Kilicoglu; Dongho Kim; Dongwoo Kim; Jin-
Dong Kim; Seungyeon Kim; Suin Kim; Chunyu Kit; Alexandre Klementiev; Roman Klinger; Ari Ko-
bren; ?ukasz Kobyli
´
nski; Philipp Koehn; Rob Koeling; Mamoru Komachi; Grzegorz Kondrak; Fang
Kong; Lingpeng Kong; Ioannis Konstas; Georgios Kontonatsios; Ioannis Korkontzelos; Zornitsa Kozareva;
Mikhail Kozhevnikov; Martin Krallinger; Jayant Krishnamurthy; Kriste Krstovski; Canasai Kruengkrai;
Germán Kruszewski; Lun-Wei Ku; Roland Kuhn; Anjishnu Kumar; Shankar Kumar; Jonathan K. Kum-
merfeld; Tsung-Ting Kuo; Nate Kushman; Tom Kwiatkowski;
Mathias Lambert; Patrik Lambert; Vasileios Lampos; Gerasimos Lampouras; Man Lan; Yanyan Lan;
Jun Lang; Phillippe Langlais; Mirella Lapata; First Name Last Name; Jey Han Lau; Angeliki Lazari-
dou; Svetlana Lazebnik; Dieu-Thu Le; Joseph Le Roux; Kenton Lee; Lung-Hao Lee; Sungjin Lee; Tao
Lei; Oliver Lemon; Alessandro Lenci; Chee Wee Leong; Gina-Anne Levow; Omer Levy; Mike Lewis;
Binyang Li; Chen Li; Chenliang Li; Fangtao Li; Haibo Li; Hao Li; Jing Li; Jiwei Li; Junhui Li; Peifeng
Li; Qi Li; Shoushan Li; Sujian Li; Wenjie Li; Yanen Li; Zhenghua Li; Maria Liakata; Percy Liang; Zhen
Liao; Chenghua Lin; Chu-Cheng Lin; Xi Victoria Lin; Wang Ling; Xiao Ling; Tal Linzen; Bing Liu; Fei
Liu; Jialu Liu; Jing Liu; Kang Liu; Qun Liu; Rui Liu; Ting Liu; Xiaodong Liu; Yang Liu; Yang Liu;
Yiqun Liu; Zhanyi Liu; Zhiyuan Liu; Nikola Ljubeši
´
c; Chi-kiu Lo; Pavel Logacev; Varvara Logacheva;
Oier Lopez de Lacalle; Bin Lu; Wei Lu; Xiaofei Lu; Marco Lui; Zhunchen Luo; Thang Luong;
xvi
Véronique Moriceau; Ji Ma; Yanjun Ma; Zongyang Ma; Wolfgang Macherey; Pranava Swaroop Mad-
hyastha; Nitin Madnani; Pierre Magistry; Gideon Mann; Christopher D. Manning; Amin Mantrach; Xian-
Ling Mao; Georgiana Marsic; Scott Martin; André F. T. Martins; Yuval Marton; Héctor Martínez Alonso;
Prashant Mathur; Takuya Matsuzaki; Arne Mauser; Jonathan May; David McClosky; John Philip Mc-
Crae; Christopher McCubbin; Ryan McDonald; Louise McNally; Avihai Mejer; Yelena Mejova; Oren
Melamud; Pablo Mendes; Florian Metze; Haitao Mi; Rada Mihalcea; Claudiu Mih?ail?a; David Mimno;
Bonan Min; Zhao-Yan Ming; Shachar Mirkin; Seyed Abolghasem Mirroshandel; Paramita Mirza; Mar-
garet Mitchell; Makoto Miwa; Yusuke Miyao; Daichi Mochihashi; Saif Mohammad; Mitra Mohtarami;
Karo Moilanen; Christian Monson; Manuel Montes; Christof Monz; Taesun Moon; Raymond Mooney;
Roser Morante; Alessandro Moschitti; Arjun Mukherjee; Philippe Muller; Dragos Munteanu; Yugo Mu-
rawaki; Brian Murphy; Lluís Màrquez;
Jian-Yun Nie; Maria Nadejde; Vinita Nahar; Preslav Nakov; Karthik Narasimhan; Shashi Narayan; Tahira
Naseem; Vivi Nastase; Borja Navarro; Roberto Navigli; Raheel Nawaz; Mark-Jan Nederhof; Arvind Nee-
lakantan; Sapna Negi; Aida Nematzadeh; Graham Neubig; Hwee Tou Ng; Vincent Ng; Nhung Nguyen;
Viet-An Nguyen; Garrett Nicolai; Jan Niehues; Rodney Nielsen; Zheng-Yu Niu; Joakim Nivre; Joel
Nothman; Scott Nowson; Pierre Nugues; Malte Nuhn;
Brendan O’Connor; Timothy O’Donnell; Stephan Oepen; Kemal Oflazer; Alice Oh; Naoaki Okazaki;
Desmond Ong; Constantin Orasan; Vicente Ordonez; Daniel Ortiz-Martínez; Miles Osborne; Mari Os-
tendorf;
Deepak P; Ulrike Pado; Muntsa Padró; Gustavo Paetzold; Georgios Paliouras; Martha Palmer; Alessio
Palmero Aprosio; Sinno J. Pan; Denis Paperno; Aasish Pappu; Rebecca J. Passonneau; Panupong Pa-
supat; Siddharth Patwardhan; Michael J. Paul; Adam Pauls; Ellie Pavlick; Lisa Pearl; Stephan Peitz;
Filipa Peleja; Xiaochang Peng; Sergio Penkale; Gerald Penn; Bianca Pereira; Bryan Perozzi; Johann Pe-
trak; Slav Petrov; Anselmo Peñas; Nghia The Pham; Lawrence Phillips; Karl Pichotta; Daniele Pighin;
Mohammad Taher Pilehvar; Manfred Pinkal; Juan Pino; Yuval Pinter; Emily Pitler; Barbara Plank;
Massimo Poesio; Tamara Polajnar; Heather Pon-Barry; Simone Paolo Ponzetto; Andrei Popescu-Belis;
Maja Popovi´c; Vinodkumar Prabhakaran; John Prager; Rashmi Prasad; Daniel Preot¸iuc-Pietro; Prokopis
Prokopidis; Matthew Purver; Verónica Pérez-Rosas;
Longhua Qian; Xian Qian; Lu Qin; Likun Qiu; Long Qiu; Xipeng Qiu; Lizhen Qu; Chris Quirk;
Ella Rabinovich; Will Radford; Preethi Raghavan; Altaf Rahman; Rafal Rak; Carlos Ramisch; Moham-
mad Sadegh Rasooli; Siva Reddy; Sravana Reddy; Marek Rei; Roi Reichart; Nils Reiter; Xiang Ren;
Philip Resnik; Corentin Ribeyre; Kyle Richardson; Sebastian Riedel; Martin Riedl; Stefan Riezler; Ger-
man Rigau; Laura Rimell; Fabio Rinaldi; Miguel Rios; Alan Ritter; Brian Roark; Angus Roberts; Kirk
Roberts; Tim Rocktäschel; Horacio Rodriguez; Marcus Rohrbach; Stephen Roller; Francesco Ronzano;
Andrew Rosenberg; Paolo Rosso; Michael Roth; Johann Roturier; Mickael Rouvier; Alla Rozovskaya;
Eugen Ruppert;
Jun Sun; Markus Saers; Saurav Sahay; Hassan Saif; Hassan Sajjad; Keisuke Sakaguchi; Mohammad
Salameh; Diarmuid Ó Séaghdha; Bahar Salehi; Tanja Samardzic; Mark Sammons; Germán Sanchis
Trilles; Federico Sangati; Baskaran Sankaran; Motoki Sano; Felix Sasaki; Ryohei Sasano; Asad Say-
eed; Carolina Scarton; David Schlangen; Natalie Schluter; Helmut Schmid; Nathan Schneider; Michael
Schuhmacher; William Schuler; H. Andrew Schwartz; Lane Schwartz; Roy Schwartz; Holger Schwenk;
Hinrich Schütze; Djamé Seddah; Satoshi Sekine; Jean Senellart; Rico Sennrich; Hendra Setiawan; Burr
xvii
Settles; Aliaksei Severyn; Serge Sharoff; Shuming Shi; Chaitanya Shivade; Maryam Siahbani; Carina
Silberer; Yanchuan Sim; Khalil Sima’an; Patrick Simianer; Kiril Simov; Sameer Singh; Kevin Small;
Peter Smit; Noah A. Smith; Jan Šnajder; Artem Sokolov; Swapna Somasundaran; Linfeng Song; Lucia
Specia; Vivek Srikumar; Miloš Stanojevi´c; Mark Steedman; Pontus Stenetorp; Brandon Stewart; Veselin
Stoyanov; Carlo Strapparava; Karl Stratos; Emma Strubell; Jannik Strötgen; Jian Su; Qi Su; Kazu-
nari Sugiyama; Le Sun; Weiwei Sun; Xu Sun; Mihai Surdeanu; Hisami Suzuki; Swabha Swayamdipta;
György Szarvas; Stan Szpakowicz; Idan Szpektor; Felipe Sánchez-Martínez; Anders Søgaard; Patrick
Saint-Dizier; Jinsong Su;
Hiroya Takamura; Partha P. Talukdar; Duyu Tang; Jian Tang; Jiliang Tang; Xavier Tannier; Kapil
Thadani; Sam Thomson; Jörg Tiedemann; Christoph Tillmann; Ivan Titov; Nadi Tomeh; Sara Tonelli;
Fatemeh Torabi Asr; Antonio Toral; Kristina Toutanova; Jun’ichi Tsujii; Oren Tsur; Yoshimasa Tsu-
ruoka; Yulia Tsvetkov; Gokhan Tur; Francis Tyers; Oscar Täckström;
Raghavendra Udupa; Lyle Ungar; Olga Uryupina; Jakob Uszkoreit;
Sowmya Vajjala; Benjamin Van Durme; Daniele Vannella; Ashish Vaswani; Marc Verhagen; Yannick
Versley; Laure Vieu; David Vilar; Luke Vilnis; Sami Virpioja; Karthik Visweswariah; Andreas Vlachos;
Rob Voigt; Svitlana Volkova; Ivan Vuli´c; Vinod Vydiswaran; Marieke van Erp; Marten van Schijndel;
Antal van den Bosch;
Houfeng Wang; Joachim Wagner; Aurelien Waite; Xiaojun Wan; Chi Wang; Chuan Wang; Hongling
Wang; Hongning Wang; Lu Wang; Rui Wang; Sida I. Wang; Wen Wang; William Yang Wang; Zhiguo
Wang; Zhongqing Wang; Zhuoran Wang; Taro Watanabe; Aleksander Wawer; Kellie Webster; Furu Wei;
Zhongyu Wei; Daniel Weld; Janyce Wiebe; Michael Wiegand; John Wieting; Jason D Williams; Steven
Wilson; Shuly Wintner; Guillaume Wisniewski; Silke Witt-Ehsani; Travis Wolfe; Kam-Fai Wong; Alina
Wróblewska; Stephen Wu; Xianchao Wu; Yuanbin Wu; Joern Wuebker;
Yunqing Xia; Tong Xiao; Boyi Xie; Pengtao Xie; Deyi Xiong; Jia Xu; Liheng Xu; Ruifeng Xu; Wei Xu;
Wenduan Xu; Ying Xu;
Rui Yan; Bin Yang; Weiwei Yang; Yaqin Yang; Yi Yang; Yi Yang; Helen Yannakoudakis; Jin-ge Yao;
Xuchen Yao; Ainur Yessenalina; Xing Yi; Wen-tau Yih; Seid Muhie Yimam; Dani Yogatama; Bei Yu;
Dianhai Yu; Liang-Chih Yu; Mo Yu; Zhou Yu; François Yvon; Tae Yano;
Deyu Zhou; Manzil Zaheer; Omar Zaidan; Fabio Massimo Zanzotto; Alessandra Zarcone; Sina Zarrieß;
Rabih Zbib; Richard Zens; Torsten Zesch; Luke Zettlemoyer; Feifei Zhai; Ke Zhai; Jiajun Zhang; Kevin
Zhang; Meishan Zhang; Min Zhang; Min Zhang; Qi Zhang; Wei Zhang; Wei-Nan Zhang; Yu Zhang;
Yuan Zhang; Yuchen Zhang; Yue Zhang; Zhe Zhang; Zhichang Zhang; Hai Zhao; Jun Zhao; Kai Zhao;
Qiuye Zhao; Shiqi Zhao; Wayne Xin Zhao; Xin Zhao; Yanyan Zhao; Zhi Zhong; Guangyou Zhou;
Guodong Zhou; Junsheng Zhou; Mianwei Zhou; Xinjie Zhou; Jingbo Zhu; Muhua Zhu; Xiaodan Zhu;
Imed Zitouni; Bowei Zou; Arkaitz Zubiaga; Pierre Zweigenbaum; Xiaoyan Zhu;
xviii
Additional Reviewers
Abeed Sarker; Abouenour Lahsen; Afra Alishahi; Afshin Rahimi; Aitor García Pablos; Aitziber Atutxa
Salazar; Alan Lee; Alicia Pérez Ramírez; Anders Johannsen; Anders Søgaard; Andreas Grivas; Anna
Jørgensen; Annemarie Friedrich; Antonio Uva; Austin Matthews; Avihai Mejer; Baolin Peng; Benjamin
Marie; Benjamin Yap; Bo Han; Bonnie Webber; Bradley Hauer; Camilo Thorne; Chong Zhou; Daniel
Torregrosa; David Buttler; Davy Weissenbacher; Desmond Ong; Ehsan Emazadeh; Elias Zavitsanos; En-
rique Vidal; Fandong Meng; Federico Nanni; Filipa Peleja; Francis Ferraro; Francisco Rangel; Gözde
Özbal; Henry Anaya-Sanchez; Hieu Pham; Ignacio Iacobacci; I-Ta Lee; Jack Hessel; James Cross; Jing
Li; Jing Ma; Jintao Ye; Joost Bastings; Kai Zhao; Kateryna Tymoshenko; Kazuya Kawakami; Ke Tao;
Ke Zhai; Keith Stevens; Lane Schwartz; Lasse Borgholt; Leila Wehbe; Long Duong; Lucie Flekova;
Marc Franco-Salvador; Marco Del Tredici; Maximin Coavoux; Meng Zhang; Michal Lukasik; Mingx-
uan Wang; Mohamed Mouine; Mohammad Salameh; Muhua Zhu; Nadir Durrani; Nan Yang; Nichola
Lubold; Nima Pourdamghani; Nina Zhou; Phil Williams; Prodromos Malakasiotis; Rachel Rudinger;
Rui Xia; Serra Sinem Tekiroglu; Shachi H Kumar; Shruti Rijhwani; Songxian Xie; Stas Semeniuta; Ste-
fano Faralli; Stephan Gouws; Stephen Maddock; Sungjoon Park; Susana Palmaz; Tobias Domhan; Tomer
Levinboim; Vaggelis Michelioudakis; Vassilis Papavassiliou; Vivek Kulkarni; Wang Ling; Wen Wang;
Weston Feely; Wu Kui; Xanda Schofield; Xiang Li; Xiaodong He; Yan Fu; Yanran Li; Yi Luan; Yijia
Liu; Yulia Tsvetkov; Zhihua Zhang.
xix
xx
Invited Speaker: Yoshua Bengio
Deep Learning of Semantic Representations
Abstract: The core ingredient of deep learning is the notion of distributed representation. This
talk will start by explaining its theoretical advantages, in comparison with non-parametric meth-
ods based on counting frequencies of occurrence of observed tuples of values (like with n-
grams). The talk will then explain how having multiple levels of representation, i.e., depth, can
in principle give another exponential advantage. Neural language models have been extremely
successful in recent years but extending their reach from language modeling to machine trans-
lation is very appealing because it forces the learned intermediate representations to capture
meaning, and we found that the resulting word embeddings are qualitatively different. Recently,
we introduced the notion of attention-based encoder-decoder systems, with impressive results
on machine translation several language pairs and for mapping an image to a sentence, and these
results will conclude the talk.
Biography: Yoshua Bengio received a PhD in Computer Science from McGill University,
Canada in 1991. After two post-doctoral years, one at M.I.T. with Michael Jordan and one
at AT&T Bell Laboratories with Yann LeCun and Vladimir Vapnik, he became professor at
the Department of Computer Science and Operations Research at Université de Montréal. He
is the author of two books and more than 200 publications, the most cited being in the areas
of deep learning, recurrent neural networks, probabilistic learning algorithms, natural language
processing and manifold learning. He is among the most cited Canadian computer scientists
and is or has been associate editor of the top journals in machine learning and neural networks.
Since ’2000 he holds a Canada Research Chair in Statistical Learning Algorithms, since ’2006
an NSERC Industrial Chair, since ’2005 his is a Senior Fellow of the Canadian Institute for Ad-
vanced Research and since 2014 he co-directs its program focused on deep learning. He is on the
board of the NIPS foundation and has been program chair and general chair for NIPS. He has co-
organized the Learning Workshop for 14 years and co-created the new International Conference
on Learning Representations. His current interests are centered around a quest for AI through
machine learning, and include fundamental questions on deep learning and representation learn-
ing, the geometry of generalization in high-dimensional spaces, manifold learning, biologically
inspired learning algorithms, and challenging applications of statistical machine learning.
xxi
xxii
Invited Speaker: Justin Grimmer
Measuring How Elected Officials and Constituents Communicate
Abstract: This talk will show how elected officials use communication to cultivate support with
constituents, how constituents express their views to elected officials, and why biases in both
kinds of communication matter for political representation. To demonstrate the bias and its ef-
fects, I propose to use novel collections of political texts and new text as data methods. Using
the new data and methods, I will show how the incentives of communication contribute to per-
ceptions of an angry public and vitriolic politicians. Among elected officials, the ideologically
extreme members of Congress disproportionately participate in policy debates, resulting in polit-
ical debates that occur between the most extreme members of each party. Among constituents,
the most ideologically extreme and angry voters disproportionately contact their member of
Congress, creating the impression of a polarized and vitriolic public. The talk will explain how
the findings help us to understand how representation occurs in American politics, while also
explaining how computational tools can help address questions in the social sciences.
Biography: Justin Grimmer is an associate professor of political science at Stanford Univer-
sity. His research examines how representation occurs in American politics using new statistical
methods. His first book Representational Style in Congress: What Legislators Say and Why It
Matters (Cambridge University Press, 2013) shows how senators define the type of representa-
tion they provide constituents and how this affects constituents’ evaluations and was awarded
the 2014 Richard Fenno Prize. His second book The Impression of Influence: How Legisla-
tor Communication and Government Spending Cultivate a Personal Vote (Princeton University
Press, 2014 with Sean J. Westwood and Solomon Messing) demonstrates how legislators ensure
they receive credit for government actions. His work has appeared in the American Political
Science Review, American Journal of Political Science, Journal of Politics, Political Analysis,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Regulation and Governance, and Poetics.
xxiii

Conference Program
Friday, September 18, 2015
18:30–20:00 Welcome Reception
Saturday, September 19, 2015
07:30–18:00 Registration
08:40–10:00 Session P1: Plenary Session
08:40–09:00 Opening Remarks and Introductory Speeches
General Chair, Program Co-Chairs and Local Co-Chairs
09:00–10:00 Invited Talk: Deep Learning of Semantic Representations
Yoshua Bengio
10:00–10:30 Coffee break
10:30–12:10 Session 1A: Semantics 1 (Long + TACL Papers)
10:30–10:55 Language Understanding for Text-based Games using Deep Reinforcement Learn-
ing
Karthik Narasimhan, Tejas Kulkarni and Regina Barzilay
10:55–11:20 Distributional vectors encode referential attributes
Abhijeet Gupta, Gemma Boleda, Marco Baroni and Sebastian Padó
11:20–11:45 Building a shared world: mapping distributional to model-theoretic semantic
spaces
Aurélie Herbelot and Eva Maria Vecchi
11:45–12:10 [TACL] Deriving Boolean Structures from Distributional Vectors
Germán Kruszewski, Denis Paperno and Marco Baroni
xxv
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 1B: Machine Translation 1 (Long + TACL Papers)
10:30–10:55 Dependency Graph-to-String Translation
Liangyou Li, Andy Way and Qun Liu
10:55–11:20 Reordering Grammar Induction
Miloš Stanojevi
´
c and Khalil Sima’an
11:20–11:45 Syntax-based Rewriting for Simultaneous Machine Translation
He He, Alvin Grissom II, John Morgan, Jordan Boyd-Graber and Hal Daumé III
11:45–12:10 [TACL] Modelling and Optimizing on Syntactic N-Grams for Statistical Machine
Translation
Rico Sennrich
10:30–12:10 Session 1C: NLP for the Web and Social Media, including Computational So-
cial Science (Long Papers)
10:30–10:55 Identifying Political Sentiment between Nation States with Social Media
Nathanael Chambers, Victor Bowen, Ethan Genco, Xisen Tian, Eric Young, Ganesh
Harihara and Eugene Yang
10:55–11:20 Open Extraction of Fine-Grained Political Statements
David Bamman and Noah A. Smith
11:20–11:45 Using Personal Traits For Brand Preference Prediction
Chao Yang, Shimei Pan, Jalal Mahmud, Huahai Yang and Padmini Srinivasan
11:45–12:10 Semantic Annotation for Microblog Topics Using Wikipedia Temporal Information
Tuan Tran, Nam Khanh Tran, Asmelash Teka Hadgu and Robert Jäschke
10:30–12:10 Session 1D (P1-4): Summarization (Long Paper Posters)
System Combination for Multi-document Summarization
Kai Hong, Mitchell Marcus and Ani Nenkova
Phrase-based Compressive Cross-Language Summarization
Jin-ge Yao, Xiaojun Wan and Jianguo Xiao
Re-evaluating Automatic Summarization with BLEU and 192 Shades of ROUGE
Yvette Graham
Indicative Tweet Generation: An Extractive Summarization Problem?
Priya Sidhaye and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung
xxvi
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 1D (P5): Language and Vision (Long Paper Posters)
Visual Bilingual Lexicon Induction with Transferred ConvNet Features
Douwe Kiela, Ivan Vuli
´
c and Stephen Clark
10:30–12:10 Session 1D (P6-9): Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining (Long Paper
Posters)
Cross Lingual Sentiment Analysis using Modified BRAE
Sarthak Jain and Shashank Batra
Monotone Submodularity in Opinion Summaries
Jayanth Jayanth, Jayaprakash Sundararaj and Pushpak Bhattacharyya
Joint Prediction for Entity/Event-Level Sentiment Analysis using Probabilistic Soft
Logic Models
Lingjia Deng and Janyce Wiebe
Learning to Recognize Affective Polarity in Similes
Ashequl Qadir, Ellen Riloff and Marilyn Walker
10:30–12:10 Session 1E (P1-3): Language and Vision (Short Paper Posters)
Cross-document Event Coreference Resolution based on Cross-media Features
Tongtao Zhang, Hongzhi Li, Heng Ji and Shih-Fu Chang
A Survey of Current Datasets for Vision and Language Research
Francis Ferraro, Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Ting-Hao Huang, Lucy Vanderwende, Jacob
Devlin, Michel Galley and Margaret Mitchell
Combining Geometric, Textual and Visual Features for Predicting Prepositions in
Image Descriptions
Arnau Ramisa, Josiah Wang, Ying Lu, Emmanuel Dellandrea, Francesc Moreno-
Noguer and Robert Gaizauskas
xxvii
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 1E (P4-16): Statistical Models and Machine Learning Methods for
NLP (Short Paper Posters)
On A Strictly Convex IBM Model 1
Andrei Simion, Michael Collins and Cliff Stein
Factorization of Latent Variables in Distributional Semantic Models
Arvid Österlund, David Ödling and Magnus Sahlgren
Non-lexical neural architecture for fine-grained POS Tagging
Matthieu Labeau, Kevin Löser and Alexandre Allauzen
Online Representation Learning in Recurrent Neural Language Models
Marek Rei
A Model of Zero-Shot Learning of Spoken Language Understanding
Majid Yazdani and James Henderson
Modeling Tweet Arrival Times using Log-Gaussian Cox Processes
Michal Lukasik, P. K. Srijith, Trevor Cohn and Kalina Bontcheva
Pre-Computable Multi-Layer Neural Network Language Models
Jacob Devlin, Chris Quirk and Arul Menezes
Birds of a Feather Linked Together: A Discriminative Topic Model using Link-based
Priors
Weiwei Yang, Jordan Boyd-Graber and Philip Resnik
Aligning Knowledge and Text Embeddings by Entity Descriptions
Huaping Zhong, Jianwen Zhang, Zhen Wang, Hai Wan and Zheng Chen
An Empirical Analysis of Optimization for Max-Margin NLP
Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick and Dan Klein
Learning Better Embeddings for Rare Words Using Distributional Representations
Irina Sergienya and Hinrich Schütze
Composing Relationships with Translations
Alberto Garcia-Duran, Antoine Bordes and Nicolas Usunier
Noise or additional information? Leveraging crowdsource annotation item agree-
ment for natural language tasks.
Emily Jamison and Iryna Gurevych
12:10–13:30 Lunch
xxviii
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
13:30–15:10 Session 2A: Statistical Modeling and Machine Learning 1 (Long + TACL Pa-
pers)
13:30–13:55 Evaluation methods for unsupervised word embeddings
Tobias Schnabel, Igor Labutov, David Mimno and Thorsten Joachims
13:55–14:20 Efficient Methods for Incorporating Knowledge into Topic Models
Yi Yang, Doug Downey and Jordan Boyd-Graber
14:20–14:45 Traversing Knowledge Graphs in Vector Space
Kelvin Guu, John Miller and Percy Liang
14:45–15:10 [TACL] Improving Topic Models with Latent Feature Word Representations
Dat Quoc Nguyen, Richard Billingsley, Lan Du and Mark Johnson
13:30–15:10 Session 2B: Tagging, Chunking and Parsing 1 (Long +TACL Papers)
13:30–13:55 Density-Driven Cross-Lingual Transfer of Dependency Parsers
Mohammad Sadegh Rasooli and Michael Collins
13:55–14:20 A Neural Network Model for Low-Resource Universal Dependency Parsing
Long Duong, Trevor Cohn, Steven Bird and Paul Cook
14:20–14:45 Improved Transition-based Parsing by Modeling Characters instead of Words with
LSTMs
Miguel Ballesteros, Chris Dyer and Noah A. Smith
14:45–15:10 [TACL] Approximation-Aware Dependency Parsing by Belief Propagation
Matthew R. Gormley, Mark Dredze and Jason Eisner
13:30–15:10 Session 2C: Summarization (Long Papers)
13:30–13:55 Sentence Compression by Deletion with LSTMs
Katja Filippova, Enrique Alfonseca, Carlos A. Colmenares, Lukasz Kaiser and
Oriol Vinyals
13:55–14:20 An Empirical Comparison Between N-gram and Syntactic Language Models for
Word Ordering
Jiangming Liu and Yue Zhang
14:20–14:45 A Neural Attention Model for Abstractive Sentence Summarization
Alexander M. Rush, Sumit Chopra and Jason Weston
14:45–15:10 Scientific Article Summarization Using Citation-Context and Article’s Discourse
Structure
Arman Cohan and Nazli Goharian
xxix
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
13:30–15:10 Session 2D (P1-9): Text Mining and NLP Applications (Long Paper Posters)
Hashtag Recommendation Using Dirichlet Process Mixture Models Incorporating
Types of Hashtags
Yeyun Gong, Qi Zhang and Xuanjing Huang
A Graph-based Readability Assessment Method using Word Coupling
Zhiwei Jiang, Gang Sun, Qing Gu, Tao Bai and Daoxu Chen
More Features Are Not Always Better: Evaluating Generalizing Models in Incident
Type Classification of Tweets
Axel Schulz, Christian Guckelsberger and Benedikt Schmidt
Flexible Domain Adaptation for Automated Essay Scoring Using Correlated Linear
Regression
Peter Phandi, Kian Ming A. Chai and Hwee Tou Ng
Show Me Your Evidence - an Automatic Method for Context Dependent Evidence
Detection
Ruty Rinott, Lena Dankin, Carlos Alzate Perez, Mitesh M. Khapra, Ehud Aharoni
and Noam Slonim
Spelling Correction of User Search Queries through Statistical Machine Translation
Saša Hasan, Carmen Heger and Saab Mansour
Human Evaluation of Grammatical Error Correction Systems
Roman Grundkiewicz, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt and Edward Gillian
Learning a Deep Hybrid Model for Semi-Supervised Text Classification
Alexander Ororbia II, C. Lee Giles and David Reitter
Joint Embedding of Query and Ad by Leveraging Implicit Feedback
Sungjin Lee and Yifan Hu
xxx
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
13:30–15:10 Session 2E (P1-11): Information Extraction (Short Paper Posters)
Automatic Extraction of Time Expressions Accross Domains in French Narratives
Mike Donald Tapi Nzali, Xavier Tannier and Aurelie Neveol
Semi-Supervised Bootstrapping of Relationship Extractors with Distributional Se-
mantics
David S. Batista, Bruno Martins and Mário J. Silva
Extraction and generalisation of variables from scientific publications
Erwin Marsi and Pinar Öztürk
Named entity recognition with document-specific KB tag gazetteers
Will Radford, Xavier Carreras and James Henderson
"A Spousal Relation Begins with a Deletion of engage and Ends with an Addition of
divorce": Learning State Changing Verbs from Wikipedia Revision History
Derry Tanti Wijaya, Ndapandula Nakashole and Tom Mitchell
Improving Distant Supervision for Information Extraction Using Label Propagation
Through Lists
Lidong Bing, Sneha Chaudhari, Richard Wang and William Cohen
An Entity-centric Approach for Overcoming Knowledge Graph Sparsity
Manjunath Hegde and Partha P. Talukdar
Semantic Relation Classification via Convolutional Neural Networks with Simple
Negative Sampling
Kun Xu, Yansong Feng, Songfang Huang and Dongyan Zhao
A Baseline Temporal Tagger for all Languages
Jannik Strötgen and Michael Gertz
Named Entity Recognition for Chinese Social Media with Jointly Trained Embed-
dings
Nanyun Peng and Mark Dredze
Inferring Binary Relation Schemas for Open Information Extraction
Kangqi Luo, Xusheng Luo and Kenny Zhu
xxxi
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
13:30–15:10 Session 2E (P12-16): Information Retrieval and Question Answering (Short
Paper Posters)
LDTM: A Latent Document Type Model for Cumulative Citation Recommendation
Jingang Wang, Dandan Song, Zhiwei Zhang, Lejian Liao, Luo Si and Chin-Yew Lin
Online Sentence Novelty Scoring for Topical Document Streams
Sungjin Lee
Global Thread-level Inference for Comment Classification in Community Question
Answering
Shafiq Joty, Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Giovanni Da San Martino, Simone Filice,
Lluís Màrquez, Alessandro Moschitti and Preslav Nakov
Key Concept Identification for Medical Information Retrieval
Jiaping Zheng and Hong Yu
Image-Mediated Learning for Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Document Retrieval
Ruka Funaki and Hideki Nakayama
15:10–15:40 Coffee break
15:40–17:20 Session 3A: Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 1 (Long Papers)
15:40–16:05 Detecting Risks in the Banking System by Sentiment Analysis
Clemens Nopp and Allan Hanbury
16:05–16:30 Sentiment Flow - A General Model of Web Review Argumentation
Henning Wachsmuth, Johannes Kiesel and Benno Stein
16:30–16:55 Neural Networks for Open Domain Targeted Sentiment
Meishan Zhang, Yue Zhang and Duy Tin Vo
16:55–17:20 Extracting Condition-Opinion Relations Toward Fine-grained Opinion Mining
Yuki Nakayama and Atsushi Fujii
xxxii
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
15:40–17:20 Session 3B: Semantics 2 (Long +TACL Papers)
15:40–16:05 A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts and Christopher D. Manning
16:05–16:30 Question-Answer Driven Semantic Role Labeling: Using Natural Language to An-
notate Natural Language
Luheng He, Mike Lewis and Luke Zettlemoyer
16:30–16:55 [TACL] It’s All Fun and Games until Someone Annotates: Video Games with a
Purpose for Linguistic Annotation.
David Jurgens and Roberto Navigli
16:55–17:20 [TACL] Semantic Proto-Roles
Drew Reisinger, Rachel Rudinger, Francis Ferraro, Kyle Rawlins and Benjamin Van
Durme
15:40–17:20 Session 3C: Information Retrieval and Question Answering (Long Papers)
15:40–16:05 Name List Only? Target Entity Disambiguation in Short Texts
Yixin Cao, Juanzi Li, Xiaofei Guo, Shuanhu Bai, Heng Ji and Jie Tang
16:05–16:30 Biography-Dependent Collaborative Entity Archiving for Slot Filling
Yu Hong, Xiaobin Wang, Yadong Chen, Jian Wang, Tongtao Zhang and Heng Ji
16:30–16:55 Stochastic Top-k ListNet
Tianyi Luo, Dong Wang, Rong Liu and Yiqiao Pan
16:55–17:20 Exploring Markov Logic Networks for Question Answering
Tushar Khot, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Eric Gribkoff, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter
Clark and Oren Etzioni
xxxiii
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
15:40–17:20 Session 3D (P1-9): Information Extraction (Long + TACL Paper Posters)
Language and Domain Independent Entity Linking with Quantified Collective Vali-
dation
Han Wang, Jin Guang Zheng, Xiaogang Ma, Peter Fox and Heng Ji
Modeling Relation Paths for Representation Learning of Knowledge Bases
Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Huanbo Luan, Maosong Sun, Siwei Rao and Song Liu
Corpus-level Fine-grained Entity Typing Using Contextual Information
Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh and Hinrich Schütze
Knowledge Base Unification via Sense Embeddings and Disambiguation
Claudio Delli Bovi, Luis Espinosa Anke and Roberto Navigli
Open-Domain Name Error Detection using a Multi-Task RNN
Hao Cheng, Hao Fang and Mari Ostendorf
Extracting Relations between Non-Standard Entities using Distant Supervision and
Imitation Learning
Isabelle Augenstein, Andreas Vlachos and Diana Maynard
Sieve-Based Spatial Relation Extraction with Expanding Parse Trees
Jennifer D’Souza and Vincent Ng
[TACL] Cross-Document Co-Reference Resolution using Sample-Based Clustering
with Knowledge Enrichment
Sourav Dutta and Gerhard Weikum
[TACL] Combining Minimally-supervised Methods for Arabic Named Entity Recog-
nition
Maha Althobaiti, Udo Kruschwitz and Massimo Poesio
xxxiv
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
15:40–17:20 Session 3E (P1-13): Text Mining and NLP Applications (Short Paper Posters)
Mr. Bennet, his coachman, and the Archbishop walk into a bar but only one of them
gets recognized: On The Difficulty of Detecting Characters in Literary Texts
Hardik Vala, David Jurgens, Andrew Piper and Derek Ruths
Convolutional Sentence Kernel from Word Embeddings for Short Text Categoriza-
tion
Jonghoon Kim, Francois Rousseau and Michalis Vazirgiannis
Predicting the Structure of Cooking Recipes
Jermsak Jermsurawong and Nizar Habash
TSDPMM: Incorporating Prior Topic Knowledge into Dirichlet Process Mixture
Models for Text Clustering
Linmei Hu, Juanzi Li, Xiaoli Li, Chao Shao and Xuzhong Wang
Sentence Modeling with Gated Recursive Neural Network
Xinchi Chen, Xipeng Qiu, Chenxi Zhu, Shiyu Wu and Xuanjing Huang
Learning Timeline Difference for Text Categorization
Fumiyo Fukumoto and Yoshimi Suzuki
Summarizing Topical Contents from PubMed Documents Using a Thematic Analysis
Sun Kim, Lana Yeganova and W John Wilbur
Recognizing Biographical Sections in Wikipedia
Alessio Palmero Aprosio and Sara Tonelli
Learn to Solve Algebra Word Problems Using Quadratic Programming
Lipu Zhou, Shuaixiang Dai and Liwei Chen
An Unsupervised Method for Discovering Lexical Variations in Roman Urdu Infor-
mal Text
Abdul Rafae, Abdul Qayyum, Muhammad Moeenuddin, Asim Karim, Hassan Saj-
jad and Faisal Kamiran
Component-Enhanced Chinese Character Embeddings
Yanran Li, Wenjie Li, Fei Sun and Sujian Li
Multi-label Text Categorization with Joint Learning Predictions-as-Features
Method
Li Li, Houfeng Wang, Xu Sun, Baobao Chang, Shi Zhao and Lei Sha
A Framework for Comparing Groups of Documents
Arun Maiya
xxxv
Saturday, September 19, 2015 (continued)
Sunday, September 20, 2015
07:30–18:00 Registration
09:00–10:00 Session P2: Plenary Session
Invited Talk: Measuring How Elected Officials and Constituents Communicate
Justin Grimmer
10:00–10:30 Coffee break
10:30–12:10 Session 4A: Information Extraction 1 (Long Papers)
10:30–10:55 C3EL: A Joint Model for Cross-Document Co-Reference Resolution and Entity
Linking
Sourav Dutta and Gerhard Weikum
10:55–11:20 Joint Mention Extraction and Classification with Mention Hypergraphs
Wei Lu and Dan Roth
11:20–11:45 FINET: Context-Aware Fine-Grained Named Entity Typing
Luciano Del Corro, Abdalghani Abujabal, Rainer Gemulla and Gerhard Weikum
11:45–12:10 Joint Entity Recognition and Disambiguation
Gang Luo, Xiaojiang Huang, Chin-Yew Lin and Zaiqing Nie
10:30–12:10 Session 4B: Statistical Modeling and Machine Learning 2 (Long Papers)
10:30–10:55 How Much Information Does a Human Translator Add to the Original?
Barret Zoph, Marjan Ghazvininejad and Kevin Knight
10:55–11:20 Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Network for Document Modeling
Rui Lin, Shujie Liu, Muyun Yang, Mu Li, Ming Zhou and Sheng Li
11:20–11:45 Auto-Sizing Neural Networks: With Applications to n-gram Language Models
Kenton Murray and David Chiang
11:45–12:10 Dual Decomposition Inference for Graphical Models over Strings
Nanyun Peng, Ryan Cotterell and Jason Eisner
xxxvi
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 4C: Discourse (Long +TACL Papers)
10:30–10:55 Discourse parsing for multi-party chat dialogues
Stergos Afantenos, Eric Kow, Nicholas Asher and Jérémy Perret
10:55–11:20 Joint prediction in MST-style discourse parsing for argumentation mining
Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede
11:20–11:45 [TACL] One Vector is Not Enough: Entity-Augmented Distributed Semantics for
Discourse Relations
Yangfeng Ji and Jacob Eisenstein
11:45–12:10 [TACL] Latent Structures for Coreference Resolution
Sebastian Martschat and Michael Strube
10:30–12:10 Session 4D (P1-9): Semantics (Long Paper Posters)
Feature-Rich Two-Stage Logistic Regression for Monolingual Alignment
Md Arafat Sultan, Steven Bethard and Tamara Sumner
Semantic Role Labeling with Neural Network Factors
Nicholas FitzGerald, Oscar Täckström, Kuzman Ganchev and Dipanjan Das
RELLY: Inferring Hypernym Relationships Between Relational Phrases
Adam Grycner, Gerhard Weikum, Jay Pujara, James Foulds and Lise Getoor
Mise en Place: Unsupervised Interpretation of Instructional Recipes
Chloé Kiddon, Ganesa Thandavam Ponnuraj, Luke Zettlemoyer and Yejin Choi
Semantic Framework for Comparison Structures in Natural Language
Omid Bakhshandeh and James Allen
Sarcastic or Not: Word Embeddings to Predict the Literal or Sarcastic Meaning of
Words
Debanjan Ghosh, Weiwei Guo and Smaranda Muresan
Incorporating Trustiness and Collective Synonym/Contrastive Evidence into Taxon-
omy Construction
Tuan Luu Anh, Jung-jae Kim and See Kiong Ng
Learning to Automatically Solve Logic Grid Puzzles
Arindam Mitra and Chitta Baral
xxxvii
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 4E (P1-13): Machine Translation and Multilinguality (Short Paper
Posters)
Improving fast_align by Reordering
Chenchen Ding, Masao Utiyama and Eiichiro Sumita
Touch-Based Pre-Post-Editing of Machine Translation Output
Benjamin Marie and Aurélien Max
A Discriminative Training Procedure for Continuous Translation Models
Quoc-Khanh DO, Alexandre Allauzen and François Yvon
System Combination for Machine Translation through Paraphrasing
Wei-Yun Ma and Kathleen McKeown
Hierarchical Incremental Adaptation for Statistical Machine Translation
Joern Wuebker, Spence Green and John DeNero
ReVal: A Simple and Effective Machine Translation Evaluation Metric Based on
Recurrent Neural Networks
Rohit Gupta, Constantin Orasan and Josef van Genabith
Investigating Continuous Space Language Models for Machine Translation Quality
Estimation
Kashif Shah, Raymond W. M. Ng, Fethi Bougares and Lucia Specia
Supervised Phrase Table Triangulation with Neural Word Embeddings for Low-
Resource Languages
Tomer Levinboim and David Chiang
Translation Invariant Word Embeddings
Kejun Huang, Matt Gardner, Evangelos Papalexakis, Christos Faloutsos, Nikos
Sidiropoulos, Tom Mitchell, Partha P. Talukdar and Xiao Fu
Hierarchical Phrase-based Stream Decoding
Andrew Finch, Xiaolin Wang, Masao Utiyama and Eiichiro Sumita
Rule Selection with Soft Syntactic Features for String-to-Tree Statistical Machine
Translation
Fabienne Braune, Nina Seemann and Alexander Fraser
Motivating Personality-aware Machine Translation
Shachar Mirkin, Scott Nowson, Caroline Brun and Julien Perez
Trans-gram, Fast Cross-lingual Word-embeddings
Jocelyn Coulmance, Jean-Marc Marty, Guillaume Wenzek and Amine Benhalloum
xxxviii
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 4E (P14-16): Computational Psycholinguistics (Short Paper Posters)
The Overall Markedness of Discourse Relations
Lifeng Jin and Marie-Catherine de Marneffe
Experiments in Open Domain Deception Detection
Verónica Pérez-Rosas and Rada Mihalcea
A model of rapid phonotactic generalization
Tal Linzen and Timothy O’Donnell
12:10–12:50 Lunch
12:50–13:30 Session P3: SIGDAT business meeting
13:30–15:10 Session 5A: Text Mining and NLP Applications 1 (Long + TACL Papers)
13:30–13:55 [TACL] Unsupervised Identification of Translationese
Ella Rabinovich and Shuly Wintner
13:55–14:20 Automatically Solving Number Word Problems by Semantic Parsing and Reasoning
Shuming Shi, Yuehui Wang, Chin-Yew Lin, Xiaojiang Liu and Yong Rui
14:20–14:45 [TACL] Which Step Do I Take First? Troubleshooting with Bayesian Models
Annie Louis and Mirella Lapata
14:45–15:10 [TACL] Problems in Current Text Simplification Research: New Data Can Help
Wei Xu, Chris Callison-Burch and Courtney Napoles
xxxix
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
13:30–15:10 Session 5B: Semantics 3 (Long +TACL Papers)
13:30–13:55 Parsing English into Abstract Meaning Representation Using Syntax-Based Ma-
chine Translation
Michael Pust, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin Knight, Daniel Marcu and Jonathan May
13:55–14:20 The Forest Convolutional Network: Compositional Distributional Semantics with a
Neural Chart and without Binarization
Phong Le and Willem Zuidema
14:20–14:45 Alignment-Based Compositional Semantics for Instruction Following
Jacob Andreas and Dan Klein
14:45–15:10 [TACL] Context-aware Frame-Semantic Role Labeling
Michael Roth and Mirella Lapata
13:30–15:10 Session 5C: Phonology and Word Segmentation (Long Papers)
13:30–13:55 Do we need bigram alignment models? On the effect of alignment quality on trans-
duction accuracy in G2P
Steffen Eger
13:55–14:20 Keyboard Logs as Natural Annotations for Word Segmentation
Fumihiko Takahasi and Shinsuke Mori
14:20–14:45 Long Short-Term Memory Neural Networks for Chinese Word Segmentation
Xinchi Chen, Xipeng Qiu, Chenxi Zhu, Pengfei Liu and Xuanjing Huang
14:45–15:10 Semi-supervised Chinese Word Segmentation based on Bilingual Information
Wei Chen and Bo Xu
xl
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
13:30–15:10 Session 5D (P1-8): Machine Translation and Multilinguality (Long Paper
Posters)
Hierarchical Back-off Modeling of Hiero Grammar based on Non-parametric
Bayesian Model
Hidetaka Kamigaito, Taro Watanabe, Hiroya Takamura, Manabu Okumura and Ei-
ichiro Sumita
Consistency-Aware Search for Word Alignment
Shiqi Shen, Yang Liu, Maosong Sun and Huanbo Luan
Graph-Based Collective Lexical Selection for Statistical Machine Translation
Jinsong Su, Deyi Xiong, Shujian Huang, Xianpei Han and Junfeng Yao
Bilingual Correspondence Recursive Autoencoder for Statistical Machine Transla-
tion
Jinsong Su, Deyi Xiong, Biao Zhang, Yang Liu, Junfeng Yao and Min Zhang
How to Avoid Unwanted Pregnancies: Domain Adaptation using Neural Network
Models
Shafiq Joty, Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, Kamla Al-Mannai, Ahmed Abdelali and
Stephan Vogel
Detecting Content-Heavy Sentences: A Cross-Language Case Study
Junyi Jessy Li and Ani Nenkova
Search-Aware Tuning for Hierarchical Phrase-based Decoding
Feifei Zhai, Liang Huang and Kai Zhao
Part-of-speech Taggers for Low-resource Languages using CCA Features
Young-Bum Kim, Benjamin Snyder and Ruhi Sarikaya
xli
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
13:30–15:10 Session 5E (P1-12): Tagging, Chunking, Sytnax and Parsing (Short Paper
Posters)
An Improved Tag Dictionary for Faster Part-of-Speech Tagging
Robert Moore
Improving Arabic Diacritization through Syntactic Analysis
Anas Shahrour, Salam Khalifa and Nizar Habash
Combining Discrete and Continuous Features for Deterministic Transition-based
Dependency Parsing
Meishan Zhang and Yue Zhang
Efficient Inner-to-outer Greedy Algorithm for Higher-order Labeled Dependency
Parsing
Xuezhe Ma and Eduard Hovy
Online Updating of Word Representations for Part-of-Speech Tagging
Wenpeng Yin, Tobias Schnabel and Hinrich Schütze
Empty Category Detection using Path Features and Distributed Case Frames
Shunsuke Takeno, Masaaki Nagata and Kazuhide Yamamoto
Foreebank: Syntactic Analysis of Customer Support Forums
Rasoul Kaljahi, Jennifer Foster, Johann Roturier, Corentin Ribeyre, Teresa Lynn
and Joseph Le Roux
Semi-supervised Dependency Parsing using Bilexical Contextual Features from
Auto-Parsed Data
Eliyahu Kiperwasser and Yoav Goldberg
Improved Transition-Based Parsing and Tagging with Neural Networks
Chris Alberti, David Weiss, Greg Coppola and Slav Petrov
Syntactic Parse Fusion
Do Kook Choe, David McClosky and Eugene Charniak
Not All Contexts Are Created Equal: Better Word Representations with Variable
Attention
Wang Ling, Yulia Tsvetkov, Silvio Amir, Ramon Fermandez, Chris Dyer, Alan W
Black, Isabel Trancoso and Chu-Cheng Lin
An Improved Non-monotonic Transition System for Dependency Parsing
Matthew Honnibal and Mark Johnson
xlii
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
15:10–15:40 Coffee break
15:40–17:20 Session 6A: Machine Translation 2 (Long Papers)
15:40–16:05 Improving Statistical Machine Translation with a Multilingual Paraphrase
Database
Ramtin Mehdizadeh Seraj, Maryam Siahbani and Anoop Sarkar
16:05–16:30 Learning Semantic Representations for Nonterminals in Hierarchical Phrase-Based
Translation
Xing Wang, Deyi Xiong and Min Zhang
16:30–16:55 A Comparison between Count and Neural Network Models Based on Joint Transla-
tion and Reordering Sequences
Andreas Guta, Tamer Alkhouli, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Joern Wuebker and Hermann
Ney
16:55–17:20 Effective Approaches to Attention-based Neural Machine Translation
Thang Luong, Hieu Pham and Christopher D. Manning
15:40–17:20 Session 6B: Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining 2 / Tagging, Chunking
and Parsing 2 (Long Papers)
15:40–16:05 Document Modeling with Gated Recurrent Neural Network for Sentiment Classifi-
cation
Duyu Tang, Bing Qin and Ting Liu
16:05–16:30 Fine-grained Opinion Mining with Recurrent Neural Networks and Word Embed-
dings
Pengfei Liu, Shafiq Joty and Helen Meng
16:30–16:55 Joint A* CCG Parsing and Semantic Role Labelling
Mike Lewis, Luheng He and Luke Zettlemoyer
16:55–17:20 Improving Semantic Parsing with Enriched Synchronous Context-Free Grammar
Junhui Li, Muhua Zhu, Wei Lu and Guodong Zhou
xliii
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
15:40–17:20 Session 6C: Language and Vision / Information Extraction 2 (Long Papers)
15:40–16:05 Solving Geometry Problems: Combining Text and Diagram Interpretation
Minjoon Seo, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Oren Etzioni and Clint Malcolm
16:05–16:30 Do You See What I Mean? Visual Resolution of Linguistic Ambiguities
Yevgeni Berzak, Andrei Barbu, Daniel Harari, Boris Katz and Shimon Ullman
16:30–16:55 Efficient and Expressive Knowledge Base Completion Using Subgraph Feature Ex-
traction
Matt Gardner and Tom Mitchell
16:55–17:20 Representing Text for Joint Embedding of Text and Knowledge Bases
Kristina Toutanova, Danqi Chen, Patrick Pantel, Hoifung Poon, Pallavi Choudhury
and Michael Gamon
15:40–17:20 Session 6D (P1-11): Statistical Models and Machine Learning Methods for
NLP (Long Paper Posters)
A Utility Model of Authors in the Scientific Community
Yanchuan Sim, Bryan Routledge and Noah A. Smith
Finding Function in Form: Compositional Character Models for Open Vocabulary
Word Representation
Wang Ling, Chris Dyer, Alan W Black, Isabel Trancoso, Ramon Fermandez, Silvio
Amir, Luis Marujo and Tiago Luis
Syntax-Aware Multi-Sense Word Embeddings for Deep Compositional Models of
Meaning
Jianpeng Cheng and Dimitri Kartsaklis
Conversation Trees: A Grammar Model for Topic Structure in Forums
Annie Louis and Shay B. Cohen
Fast, Flexible Models for Discovering Topic Correlation across Weakly-Related
Collections
Jingwei Zhang, Aaron Gerow, Jaan Altosaar, James Evans and Richard Jean So
Molding CNNs for text: non-linear, non-consecutive convolutions
Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay and Tommi Jaakkola
xliv
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
Multi-Perspective Sentence Similarity Modeling with Convolutional Neural Net-
works
Hua He, Kevin Gimpel and Jimmy Lin
Posterior calibration and exploratory analysis for natural language processing
models
Khanh Nguyen and Brendan O’Connor
A Generative Word Embedding Model and its Low Rank Positive Semidefinite Solu-
tion
Shaohua Li, Jun Zhu and Chunyan Miao
Reading Documents for Bayesian Online Change Point Detection
Taehoon Kim and Jaesik Choi
15:40–17:20 Session 6E (P1-13): Semantics (Short Paper Posters)
Recognizing Textual Entailment Using Probabilistic Inference
Lei Sha, Sujian Li, Baobao Chang, Zhifang Sui and Tingsong Jiang
Chinese Semantic Role Labeling with Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Networks
Zhen Wang, Tingsong Jiang, Baobao Chang and Zhifang Sui
Unsupervised Negation Focus Identification with Word-Topic Graph Model
Bowei Zou, Guodong Zhou and Qiaoming Zhu
Reverse-engineering Language: A Study on the Semantic Compositionality of Ger-
man Compounds
Corina Dima
Event Detection and Factuality Assessment with Non-Expert Supervision
Kenton Lee, Yoav Artzi, Yejin Choi and Luke Zettlemoyer
Large-Scale Acquisition of Entailment Pattern Pairs by Exploiting Transitivity
Julien Kloetzer, Kentaro Torisawa, Chikara Hashimoto and Jong-Hoon Oh
Context-Dependent Knowledge Graph Embedding
Yuanfei Luo, Quan Wang, Bin Wang and Li Guo
Learning to Identify the Best Contexts for Knowledge-based WSD
Evgenia Wasserman Pritsker, William Cohen and Einat Minkov
xlv
Sunday, September 20, 2015 (continued)
Measuring Prerequisite Relations Among Concepts
Chen Liang, Zhaohui Wu, Wenyi Huang and C. Lee Giles
Adapting Phrase-based Machine Translation to Normalise Medical Terms in Social
Media Messages
Nut Limsopatham and Nigel Collier
Script Induction as Language Modeling
Rachel Rudinger, Pushpendre Rastogi, Francis Ferraro and Benjamin Van Durme
Online Learning of Interpretable Word Embeddings
Hongyin Luo, Zhiyuan Liu, Huanbo Luan and Maosong Sun
A Strong Lexical Matching Method for the Machine Comprehension Test
Ellery Smith, Nicola Greco, Matko Bosnjak and Andreas Vlachos
19:00–23:00 Conference Dinner
Monday, September 21, 2015
07:30–18:00 Registration
09:00–10:00 Session P4: Plenary Session
09:00–09:05 Best Paper Awards
Chris Callison-Burch and Jian Su
09:05–09:30 Broad-coverage CCG Semantic Parsing with AMR
Yoav Artzi, Kenton Lee and Luke Zettlemoyer
09:30–09:55 Semantically Conditioned LSTM-based Natural Language Generation for Spoken
Dialogue Systems
Tsung-Hsien Wen, Milica Gasic, Nikola Mrkši
´
c, Pei-Hao Su, David Vandyke and
Steve Young
09:55–10:05 A Large Annotated Corpus for Learning Natural Language Inference
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts and Christopher D. Manning
10:05–10:30 Coffee break
xlvi
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 7A: Semantics 4 (Long +TACL Papers)
10:30–10:55 Do Multi-Sense Embeddings Improve Natural Language Understanding?
Jiwei Li and Dan Jurafsky
10:55–11:20 Learning Semantic Composition to Detect Non-compositionality of Multiword Ex-
pressions
Majid Yazdani, Meghdad Farahmand and James Henderson
11:20–11:45 Solving General Arithmetic Word Problems
Subhro Roy and Dan Roth
11:45–12:10 [TACL] From Paraphrase Database to Compositional Paraphrase Model and Back
John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, Karen Livescu and Dan Roth
10:30–12:10 Session 7B: Information Extraction 3 (Long Papers)
10:30–10:55 Distant Supervision for Relation Extraction via Piecewise Convolutional Neural
Networks
Daojian Zeng, Kang Liu, Yubo Chen and Jun Zhao
10:55–11:20 CORE: Context-Aware Open Relation Extraction with Factorization Machines
Fabio Petroni, Luciano Del Corro and Rainer Gemulla
11:20–11:45 Improved Relation Extraction with Feature-Rich Compositional Embedding Models
Matthew R. Gormley, Mo Yu and Mark Dredze
11:45–12:10 Classifying Relations via Long Short Term Memory Networks along Shortest De-
pendency Paths
Yan Xu, Lili Mou, Ge Li, Yunchuan Chen, Hao Peng and Zhi Jin
10:30–12:10 Session 7C: Computational Psycholinguistics / Machine Translation 3 (Long
Papers)
10:30–10:55 A Computational Cognitive Model of Novel Word Generalization
Aida Nematzadeh, Erin Grant and Suzanne Stevenson
10:55–11:20 Personality Profiling of Fictional Characters using Sense-Level Links between Lex-
ical Resources
Lucie Flekova and Iryna Gurevych
11:20–11:45 Leave-one-out Word Alignment without Garbage Collector Effects
Xiaolin Wang, Masao Utiyama, Andrew Finch, Taro Watanabe and Eiichiro Sumita
11:45–12:10 Generalized Agreement for Bidirectional Word Alignment
Chunyang Liu, Yang Liu, Maosong Sun, Huanbo Luan and Heng Yu
xlvii
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 7D (P1-6): Word Segmentation, Tagging and Parsing (Long +TACL
Paper Posters)
A Transition-based Model for Joint Segmentation, POS-tagging and Normalization
Tao Qian, Yue Zhang, Meishan Zhang, Yafeng Ren and Donghong Ji
Multilingual discriminative lexicalized phrase structure parsing
Benoit Crabbé
Hierarchical Low-Rank Tensors for Multilingual Transfer Parsing
Yuan Zhang and Regina Barzilay
Diversity in Spectral Learning for Natural Language Parsing
Shashi Narayan and Shay B. Cohen
Transition-based Dependency Parsing Using Two Heterogeneous Gated Recursive
Neural Networks
Xinchi Chen, Yaqian Zhou, Chenxi Zhu, Xipeng Qiu and Xuanjing Huang
[TACL] A Graph-based Lattice Dependency Parser for Joint Morphological Seg-
mentation and Syntactic Analysis
Wolfgang Seeker and Özlem Çetino
?
glu
10:30–12:10 Session 7E (P1-3): Spoken Language Processing (Short Paper Posters)
Turn-taking phenomena in incremental dialogue systems
Hatim Khouzaimi, Romain Laroche and Fabrice Lefevre
Hierarchical Latent Words Language Models for Robust Modeling to Out-Of Do-
main Tasks
Ryo Masumura, Taichi Asami, Takanobu Oba, Hirokazu Masataki, Sumitaka
Sakauchi and Akinori Ito
A Coarse-Grained Model for Optimal Coupling of ASR and SMT Systems for Speech
Translation
Gaurav Kumar, Graeme Blackwood, Jan Trmal, Daniel Povey and Sanjeev Khudan-
pur
xlviii
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
10:30–12:10 Session 7E (P4-18): Summarization (Short Paper Posters)
Abstractive Multi-document Summarization with Semantic Information Extraction
Wei Li
Concept-based Summarization using Integer Linear Programming: From Concept
Pruning to Multiple Optimal Solutions
Florian Boudin, Hugo Mougard and Benoit Favre
GhostWriter: Using an LSTM for Automatic Rap Lyric Generation
Peter Potash, Alexey Romanov and Anna Rumshisky
Better Summarization Evaluation with Word Embeddings for ROUGE
Jun-Ping Ng and Viktoria Abrecht
Krimping texts for better summarization
Marina Litvak, Mark Last and Natalia Vanetik
From the Virtual to the RealWorld: Referring to Objects in Real-World Spatial
Scenes
Dimitra Gkatzia, Verena Rieser, Phil Bartie and William Mackaness
An Unsupervised Bayesian Modelling Approach for Storyline Detection on News
Articles
Deyu Zhou, Haiyang Xu and Yulan He
Topical Coherence for Graph-based Extractive Summarization
Daraksha Parveen, Hans-Martin Ramsl and Michael Strube
xlix
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
Summarizing Student Responses to Reflection Prompts
Wencan Luo and Diane Litman
Extractive Summarization by Maximizing Semantic Volume
Dani Yogatama, Fei Liu and Noah A. Smith
LCSTS: A Large Scale Chinese Short Text Summarization Dataset
Baotian Hu, Qingcai Chen and Fangze Zhu
Discourse Planning with an N-gram Model of Relations
Or Biran and Kathleen McKeown
Experiments with Generative Models for Dependency Tree Linearization
Richard Futrell and Edward Gibson
Summarization Based on Embedding Distributions
Hayato Kobayashi, Masaki Noguchi and Taichi Yatsuka
Reversibility reconsidered: finite-state factors for efficient probabilistic sampling in
parsing and generation
Marc Dymetman, Sriram Venkatapathy and Chunyang Xiao
12:10–13:30 Lunch
13:30–15:15 Session 8A: Fun and Quirky Topics (Short Papers)
13:30–13:45 A quantitative analysis of gender differences in movies using psycholinguistic nor-
matives
Anil Ramakrishna, Nikolaos Malandrakis, Elizabeth Staruk and Shrikanth
Narayanan
13:45–14:00 EMNLP versus ACL: Analyzing NLP research over time
Sujatha Das Gollapalli and Xiaoli Li
14:00–14:15 Answering Elementary Science Questions by Constructing Coherent Scenes using
Background Knowledge
Yang Li and Peter Clark
14:15–14:30 WikiQA: A Challenge Dataset for Open-Domain Question Answering
Yi Yang, Wen-tau Yih and Christopher Meek
l
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
14:30–14:45 Personalized Machine Translation: Predicting Translational Preferences
Shachar Mirkin and Jean-Luc Meunier
14:45–15:00 Talking to the crowd: What do people react to in online discussions?
Aaron Jaech, Victoria Zayats, Hao Fang, Mari Ostendorf and Hannaneh Hajishirzi
15:00–15:15 What Your Username Says About You
Aaron Jaech and Mari Ostendorf
13:30–15:15 Session 8B: Semantics 5 (Short Papers)
13:30–13:45 Knowledge Base Inference using Bridging Entities
Bhushan Kotnis, Pradeep Bansal and Partha P. Talukdar
13:45–14:00 Specializing Word Embeddings for Similarity or Relatedness
Douwe Kiela, Felix Hill and Stephen Clark
14:00–14:15 Evaluation of Word Vector Representations by Subspace Alignment
Yulia Tsvetkov, Manaal Faruqui, Wang Ling, Guillaume Lample and Chris Dyer
14:15–14:30 Higher-order logical inference with compositional semantics
Koji Mineshima, Pascual Martínez-Gómez, Yusuke Miyao and Daisuke Bekki
14:30–14:45 Any-language frame-semantic parsing
Anders Johannsen, Héctor Martínez Alonso and Anders Søgaard
15:00–15:15 What’s in an Embedding? Analyzing Word Embeddings through Multilingual Eval-
uation
Arne Köhn
li
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
13:30–15:15 Session 8C: Statistical Modeling, Machine Learning / Machine Translation
(Short Papers)
13:30–13:45 Joint Event Trigger Identification and Event Coreference Resolution with Structured
Perceptron
Jun Araki and Teruko Mitamura
13:45–14:00 A Joint Dependency Model of Morphological and Syntactic Structure for Statistical
Machine Translation
Rico Sennrich and Barry Haddow
14:00–14:15 Variable-Length Word Encodings for Neural Translation Models
Rohan Chitnis and John DeNero
14:15–14:30 A Binarized Neural Network Joint Model for Machine Translation
Jingyi Zhang, Masao Utiyama, Eiichiro Sumita, Graham Neubig and Satoshi Naka-
mura
14:30–14:45 Bayesian Optimization of Text Representations
Dani Yogatama, Lingpeng Kong and Noah A. Smith
14:45–15:00 A Comparative Study on Regularization Strategies for Embedding-based Neural
Networks
Hao Peng, Lili Mou, Ge Li, Yunchuan Chen, Yangyang Lu and Zhi Jin
15:00–15:15 Efficient Hyper-parameter Optimization for NLP Applications
Lidan Wang, Minwei Feng, Bowen Zhou, Bing Xiang and Sridhar Mahadevan
13:30–15:15 Session 8D (P1-6): NLP for the Web and Social Media, including Computa-
tional Social Science (Long Paper Posters)
Improved Arabic Dialect Classification with Social Media Data
Fei Huang
Exploiting Debate Portals for Semi-Supervised Argumentation Mining in User-
Generated Web Discourse
Ivan Habernal and Iryna Gurevych
Confounds and Consequences in Geotagged Twitter Data
Umashanthi Pavalanathan and Jacob Eisenstein
Modeling Reportable Events as Turning Points in Narrative
Jessica Ouyang and Kathleen McKeown
lii
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
Towards the Extraction of Customer-to-Customer Suggestions from Reviews
Sapna Negi and Paul Buitelaar
Using Content-level Structures for Summarizing Microblog Repost Trees
Jing Li, Wei Gao, Zhongyu Wei, Baolin Peng and Kam-Fai Wong
13:30–15:15 Session 8D (P7-9): Discourse (Long Paper Posters)
Intra-sentential Zero Anaphora Resolution using Subject Sharing Recognition
Ryu Iida, Kentaro Torisawa, Chikara Hashimoto, Jong-Hoon Oh and Julien Kloetzer
Estimation of Discourse Segmentation Labels from Crowd Data
Ziheng Huang, Jialu Zhong and Rebecca J. Passonneau
Comparing Word Representations for Implicit Discourse Relation Classification
Chloé Braud and Pascal Denis
13:30–15:15 Session 8E (P1-9): Discourse (Short Paper Posters)
Better Document-level Sentiment Analysis from RST Discourse Parsing
Parminder Bhatia, Yangfeng Ji and Jacob Eisenstein
Closing the Gap: Domain Adaptation from Explicit to Implicit Discourse Relations
Yangfeng Ji, Gongbo Zhang and Jacob Eisenstein
Wikification of Concept Mentions within Spoken Dialogues Using Domain Con-
straints from Wikipedia
Seokhwan Kim, Rafael E. Banchs and Haizhou Li
Shallow Convolutional Neural Network for Implicit Discourse Relation Recognition
Biao Zhang, Jinsong Su, Deyi Xiong, Yaojie Lu, Hong Duan and Junfeng Yao
On the Role of Discourse Markers for Discriminating Claims and Premises in Ar-
gumentative Discourse
Judith Eckle-Kohler, Roland Kluge and Iryna Gurevych
Fatal or not? Finding errors that lead to dialogue breakdowns in chat-oriented
dialogue systems
Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Masahiro Mizukami, Kotaro Funakoshi, Masahiro Araki,
Hiroshi Tsukahara and Yuka Kobayashi
liii
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
Learning Word Meanings and Grammar for Describing Everyday Activities in
Smart Environments
Muhammad Attamimi, Yuji Ando, Tomoaki Nakamura, Takayuki Nagai, Daichi
Mochihashi, Ichiro Kobayashi and Hideki Asoh
Discourse Element Identification in Student Essays based on Global and Local Co-
hesion
Wei Song, Ruiji Fu, Lizhen Liu and Ting Liu
Adapting Coreference Resolution for Narrative Processing
Quynh Ngoc Thi Do, Steven Bethard and Marie-Francine Moens
13:30–15:15 Session 8E (P10-15): Phonology, Morphology and Word Segmentation (Short
Paper Posters)
Joint Lemmatization and Morphological Tagging with Lemming
Thomas Müller, Ryan Cotterell, Alexander Fraser and Hinrich Schütze
Transducer Disambiguation with Sparse Topological Features
Gonzalo Iglesias, Adrià de Gispert and Bill Byrne
Arabic Diacritization with Recurrent Neural Networks
Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass
Automatic Diacritics Restoration for Hungarian
Attila Novák and Borbála Siklósi
Morphological Analysis for Unsegmented Languages using Recurrent Neural Net-
work Language Model
Hajime Morita, Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi
Can Symbol Grounding Improve Low-Level NLP? Word Segmentation as a Case
Study
Hirotaka Kameko, Shinsuke Mori and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka
15:15–15:40 Coffee break
liv
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
15:40–17:20 Session 9A: Statistical Modeling and Machine Learning 3 (Long + TACL Pa-
pers)
15:40–16:05 When Are Tree Structures Necessary for Deep Learning of Representations?
Jiwei Li, Thang Luong, Dan Jurafsky and Eduard Hovy
16:05–16:30 Discriminative Neural Sentence Modeling by Tree-Based Convolution
Lili Mou, Hao Peng, Ge Li, Yan Xu, Lu Zhang and Zhi Jin
16:30–16:55 Multi-Timescale Long Short-Term Memory Neural Network for Modelling Sen-
tences and Documents
Pengfei Liu, Xipeng Qiu, Xinchi Chen, Shiyu Wu and Xuanjing Huang
16:55–17:20 [TACL] Learning Structural Kernels for Natural Language Processing
Daniel Beck, Trevor Cohn, Christian Hardmeier and Lucia Specia
15:40–17:20 Session 9B: Text Mining and NLP Applications 2 (Long Papers)
15:40–16:05 Verbal and Nonverbal Clues for Real-life Deception Detection
Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Mohamed Abouelenien, Rada Mihalcea, Yao Xiao, CJ Lin-
ton and Mihai Burzo
16:05–16:30 Social Media Text Classification under Negative Covariate Shift
Geli Fei and Bing Liu
16:30–16:55 Co-Training for Topic Classification of Scholarly Data
Cornelia Caragea, Florin Bulgarov and Rada Mihalcea
16:55–17:20 Humor Recognition and Humor Anchor Extraction
Diyi Yang, Alon Lavie, Chris Dyer and Eduard Hovy
lv
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
15:40–17:20 Session 9C: Spoken Language Processing and Language Modeling (Long Pa-
pers)
15:40–16:05 Topic Identification and Discovery on Text and Speech
Chandler May, Francis Ferraro, Alan McCree, Jonathan Wintrode, Daniel Garcia-
Romero and Benjamin Van Durme
16:05–16:30 A Dynamic Programming Algorithm for Computing N-gram Posteriors from Lat-
tices
Dogan Can and Shrikanth Narayanan
16:30–16:55 Bilingual Structured Language Models for Statistical Machine Translation
Ekaterina Garmash and Christof Monz
16:55–17:20 Compact, Efficient and Unlimited Capacity: Language Modeling with Compressed
Suffix Trees
Ehsan Shareghi, Matthias Petri, Gholamreza Haffari and Trevor Cohn
15:40–17:20 Session 9D (P1-8): Semantics (Long Paper Posters)
ERSOM: A Structural Ontology Matching Approach Using Automatically Learned
Entity Representation
Chuncheng Xiang, Tingsong Jiang, Baobao Chang and Zhifang Sui
A Single Word is not Enough: Ranking Multiword Expressions Using Distributional
Semantics
Martin Riedl and Chris Biemann
Syntactic Dependencies and Distributed Word Representations for Analogy Detec-
tion and Mining
Likun Qiu, Yue Zhang and Yanan Lu
Navigating the Semantic Horizon using Relative Neighborhood Graphs
Amaru Cuba Gyllensten and Magnus Sahlgren
Multi- and Cross-Modal Semantics Beyond Vision: Grounding in Auditory Percep-
tion
Douwe Kiela and Stephen Clark
Automatic recognition of habituals: a three-way classification of clausal aspect
Annemarie Friedrich and Manfred Pinkal
Distributed Representations for Unsupervised Semantic Role Labeling
Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata
A Tableau Prover for Natural Logic and Language
Lasha Abzianidze
lvi
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
15:40–17:20 Session 9E (P1-9): Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining (Short Paper
Posters)
JEAM: A Novel Model for Cross-Domain Sentiment Classification Based on Emo-
tion Analysis
Kun-Hu Luo, Zhi-Hong Deng, Hongliang Yu and Liang-Chen Wei
PhraseRNN: Phrase Recursive Neural Network for Aspect-based Sentiment Analy-
sis
Thien Hai Nguyen and Kiyoaki Shirai
ASTD: Arabic Sentiment Tweets Dataset
Mahmoud Nabil, Mohamed Aly and Amir Atiya
Adjective Intensity and Sentiment Analysis
Raksha Sharma, Mohit Gupta, Astha Agarwal and Pushpak Bhattacharyya
The Rating Game: Sentiment Rating Reproducibility from Text
Lasse Borgholt, Peter Simonsen and Dirk Hovy
A Multi-lingual Annotated Dataset for Aspect-Oriented Opinion Mining
Salud M. Jiménez-Zafra, Giacomo Berardi, Andrea Esuli, Diego Marcheggiani,
María Teresa Martín-Valdivia and Alejandro Moreo Fernández
Deep Convolutional Neural Network Textual Features and Multiple Kernel Learning
for Utterance-level Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
Soujanya Poria, Erik Cambria and Alexander Gelbukh
SLSA: A Sentiment Lexicon for Standard Arabic
Ramy Eskander and Owen Rambow
Reinforcing the Topic of Embeddings with Theta Pure Dependence for Text Classi-
fication
Ning Xing, Yuexian Hou, Peng Zhang, Wenjie Li and Dawei Song
lvii
Monday, September 21, 2015 (continued)
15:40–17:20 Session 9E (P10-17): NLP for the Web and Social Media, including Computa-
tional Social Science (Short Paper Posters)
That’s So Annoying!!!: A Lexical and Frame-Semantic Embedding Based Data
Augmentation Approach to Automatic Categorization of Annoying Behaviors using
#petpeeve Tweets
William Yang Wang and Diyi Yang
Detection of Steganographic Techniques on Twitter
Alex Wilson, Phil Blunsom and Andrew Ker
#SupportTheCause: Identifying Motivations to Participate in Online Health Cam-
paigns
Dong Nguyen, Tijs van den Broek, Claudia Hauff, Djoerd Hiemstra and Michel
Ehrenhard
An Analysis of Domestic Abuse Discourse on Reddit
Nicolas Schrading, Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Ray Ptucha and Christopher Homan
Twitter-scale New Event Detection via K-term Hashing
Dominik Wurzer, Victor Lavrenko and Miles Osborne
Classifying Tweet Level Judgements of Rumours in Social Media
Michal Lukasik, Trevor Cohn and Kalina Bontcheva
Identification and Verification of Simple Claims about Statistical Properties
Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel
17:30–17:50 Session P5: Closing Remarks
18:30–20:00 Farewell Drink
lviii
List of Papers
Language Understanding for Text-based Games using Deep Reinforcement Learning
Karthik Narasimhan, Tejas Kulkarni and Regina Barzilay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Distributional vectors encode referential attributes
Abhijeet Gupta, Gemma Boleda, Marco Baroni and Sebastian Padó . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Building a shared world: mapping distributional to model-theoretic semantic spaces
Aurélie Herbelot and Eva Maria Vecchi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Dependency Graph-to-String Translation
Liangyou Li, Andy Way and Qun Liu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Reordering Grammar Induction
Miloš Stanojevi
´
c and Khalil Sima’an . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Syntax-based Rewriting for Simultaneous Machine Translation
He He, Alvin Grissom II, John Morgan, Jordan Boyd-Graber and Hal Daumé III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Identifying Political Sentiment between Nation States with Social Media
Nathanael Chambers, Victor Bowen, Ethan Genco, Xisen Tian, Eric Young, Ganesh Harihara and
Eugene Yang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Open Extraction of Fine-Grained Political Statements
David Bamman and Noah A. Smith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Using Personal Traits For Brand Preference Prediction
Chao Yang, Shimei Pan, Jalal Mahmud, Huahai Yang and Padmini Srinivasan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Semantic Annotation for Microblog Topics Using Wikipedia Temporal Information
Tuan Tran, Nam Khanh Tran, Asmelash Teka Hadgu and Robert Jäschke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
System Combination for Multi-document Summarization
Kai Hong, Mitchell Marcus and Ani Nenkova . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Phrase-based Compressive Cross-Language Summarization
Jin-ge Yao, Xiaojun Wan and Jianguo Xiao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
Re-evaluating Automatic Summarization with BLEU and 192 Shades of ROUGE
Yvette Graham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
Indicative Tweet Generation: An Extractive Summarization Problem?
Priya Sidhaye and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
Visual Bilingual Lexicon Induction with Transferred ConvNet Features
Douwe Kiela, Ivan Vuli
´
c and Stephen Clark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
Cross Lingual Sentiment Analysis using Modified BRAE
Sarthak Jain and Shashank Batra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
Monotone Submodularity in Opinion Summaries
Jayanth Jayanth, Jayaprakash Sundararaj and Pushpak Bhattacharyya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
lix
Joint Prediction for Entity/Event-Level Sentiment Analysis using Probabilistic Soft Logic Models
Lingjia Deng and Janyce Wiebe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Learning to Recognize Affective Polarity in Similes
Ashequl Qadir, Ellen Riloff and Marilyn Walker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190
Cross-document Event Coreference Resolution based on Cross-media Features
Tongtao Zhang, Hongzhi Li, Heng Ji and Shih-Fu Chang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
A Survey of Current Datasets for Vision and Language Research
Francis Ferraro, Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Ting-Hao Huang, Lucy Vanderwende, Jacob Devlin, Michel
Galley and Margaret Mitchell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
Combining Geometric, Textual and Visual Features for Predicting Prepositions in Image Descriptions
Arnau Ramisa, Josiah Wang, Ying Lu, Emmanuel Dellandrea, Francesc Moreno-Noguer and Robert
Gaizauskas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
On A Strictly Convex IBM Model 1
Andrei Simion, Michael Collins and Cliff Stein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Factorization of Latent Variables in Distributional Semantic Models
Arvid Österlund, David Ödling and Magnus Sahlgren . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
Non-lexical neural architecture for fine-grained POS Tagging
Matthieu Labeau, Kevin Löser and Alexandre Allauzen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
Online Representation Learning in Recurrent Neural Language Models
Marek Rei . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
A Model of Zero-Shot Learning of Spoken Language Understanding
Majid Yazdani and James Henderson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 244
Modeling Tweet Arrival Times using Log-Gaussian Cox Processes
Michal Lukasik, P. K. Srijith, Trevor Cohn and Kalina Bontcheva. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .250
Pre-Computable Multi-Layer Neural Network Language Models
Jacob Devlin, Chris Quirk and Arul Menezes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256
Birds of a Feather Linked Together: A Discriminative Topic Model using Link-based Priors
Weiwei Yang, Jordan Boyd-Graber and Philip Resnik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
Aligning Knowledge and Text Embeddings by Entity Descriptions
Huaping Zhong, Jianwen Zhang, Zhen Wang, Hai Wan and Zheng Chen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 267
An Empirical Analysis of Optimization for Max-Margin NLP
Jonathan K. Kummerfeld, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick and Dan Klein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
Learning Better Embeddings for Rare Words Using Distributional Representations
Irina Sergienya and Hinrich Schütze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 280
Composing Relationships with Translations
Alberto Garcia-Duran, Antoine Bordes and Nicolas Usunier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 286
Noise or additional information? Leveraging crowdsource annotation item agreement for natural lan-
guage tasks.
Emily Jamison and Iryna Gurevych . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 291
lx
Evaluation methods for unsupervised word embeddings
Tobias Schnabel, Igor Labutov, David Mimno and Thorsten Joachims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 298
Efficient Methods for Incorporating Knowledge into Topic Models
Yi Yang, Doug Downey and Jordan Boyd-Graber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
Traversing Knowledge Graphs in Vector Space
Kelvin Guu, John Miller and Percy Liang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
Density-Driven Cross-Lingual Transfer of Dependency Parsers
Mohammad Sadegh Rasooli and Michael Collins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
A Neural Network Model for Low-Resource Universal Dependency Parsing
Long Duong, Trevor Cohn, Steven Bird and Paul Cook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
Improved Transition-based Parsing by Modeling Characters instead of Words with LSTMs
Miguel Ballesteros, Chris Dyer and Noah A. Smith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
Sentence Compression by Deletion with LSTMs
Katja Filippova, Enrique Alfonseca, Carlos A. Colmenares, Lukasz Kaiser and Oriol Vinyals . 360
An Empirical Comparison Between N-gram and Syntactic Language Models for Word Ordering
Jiangming Liu and Yue Zhang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 369
A Neural Attention Model for Abstractive Sentence Summarization
Alexander M. Rush, Sumit Chopra and Jason Weston . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 379
Scientific Article Summarization Using Citation-Context and Article’s Discourse Structure
Arman Cohan and Nazli Goharian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 390
Hashtag Recommendation Using Dirichlet Process Mixture Models Incorporating Types of Hashtags
Yeyun Gong, Qi Zhang and Xuanjing Huang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 401
A Graph-based Readability Assessment Method using Word Coupling
Zhiwei Jiang, Gang Sun, Qing Gu, Tao Bai and Daoxu Chen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411
More Features Are Not Always Better: Evaluating Generalizing Models in Incident Type Classification
of Tweets
Axel Schulz, Christian Guckelsberger and Benedikt Schmidt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 421
Flexible Domain Adaptation for Automated Essay Scoring Using Correlated Linear Regression
Peter Phandi, Kian Ming A. Chai and Hwee Tou Ng. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .431
Show Me Your Evidence - an Automatic Method for Context Dependent Evidence Detection
Ruty Rinott, Lena Dankin, Carlos Alzate Perez, Mitesh M. Khapra, Ehud Aharoni and Noam Slonim
440
Spelling Correction of User Search Queries through Statistical Machine Translation
Saša Hasan, Carmen Heger and Saab Mansour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .451
Human Evaluation of Grammatical Error Correction Systems
Roman Grundkiewicz, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt and Edward Gillian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 461
Learning a Deep Hybrid Model for Semi-Supervised Text Classification
Alexander Ororbia II, C. Lee Giles and David Reitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 471
lxi
Joint Embedding of Query and Ad by Leveraging Implicit Feedback
Sungjin Lee and Yifan Hu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 482
Automatic Extraction of Time Expressions Accross Domains in French Narratives
Mike Donald Tapi Nzali, Xavier Tannier and Aurelie Neveol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 492
Semi-Supervised Bootstrapping of Relationship Extractors with Distributional Semantics
David S. Batista, Bruno Martins and Mário J. Silva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 499
Extraction and generalisation of variables from scientific publications
Erwin Marsi and Pinar Öztürk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505
Named entity recognition with document-specific KB tag gazetteers
Will Radford, Xavier Carreras and James Henderson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 512
"A Spousal Relation Begins with a Deletion of engage and Ends with an Addition of divorce": Learning
State Changing Verbs from Wikipedia Revision History
Derry Tanti Wijaya, Ndapandula Nakashole and Tom Mitchell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 518
Improving Distant Supervision for Information Extraction Using Label Propagation Through Lists
Lidong Bing, Sneha Chaudhari, Richard Wang and William Cohen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 524
An Entity-centric Approach for Overcoming Knowledge Graph Sparsity
Manjunath Hegde and Partha P. Talukdar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 530
Semantic Relation Classification via Convolutional Neural Networks with Simple Negative Sampling
Kun Xu, Yansong Feng, Songfang Huang and Dongyan Zhao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 536
A Baseline Temporal Tagger for all Languages
Jannik Strötgen and Michael Gertz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 541
Named Entity Recognition for Chinese Social Media with Jointly Trained Embeddings
Nanyun Peng and Mark Dredze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 548
Inferring Binary Relation Schemas for Open Information Extraction
Kangqi Luo, Xusheng Luo and Kenny Zhu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 555
LDTM: A Latent Document Type Model for Cumulative Citation Recommendation
Jingang Wang, Dandan Song, Zhiwei Zhang, Lejian Liao, Luo Si and Chin-Yew Lin . . . . . . . . . 561
Online Sentence Novelty Scoring for Topical Document Streams
Sungjin Lee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 567
Global Thread-level Inference for Comment Classification in Community Question Answering
Shafiq Joty, Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Giovanni Da San Martino, Simone Filice, Lluís Màrquez,
Alessandro Moschitti and Preslav Nakov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 573
Key Concept Identification for Medical Information Retrieval
Jiaping Zheng and Hong Yu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 579
Image-Mediated Learning for Zero-Shot Cross-Lingual Document Retrieval
Ruka Funaki and Hideki Nakayama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 585
Detecting Risks in the Banking System by Sentiment Analysis
Clemens Nopp and Allan Hanbury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 591
lxii
Sentiment Flow - A General Model of Web Review Argumentation
Henning Wachsmuth, Johannes Kiesel and Benno Stein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 601
Neural Networks for Open Domain Targeted Sentiment
Meishan Zhang, Yue Zhang and Duy Tin Vo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 612
Extracting Condition-Opinion Relations Toward Fine-grained Opinion Mining
Yuki Nakayama and Atsushi Fujii . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 622
A large annotated corpus for learning natural language inference
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts and Christopher D. Manning . . . . . . . . . . 632
Question-Answer Driven Semantic Role Labeling: Using Natural Language to Annotate Natural Lan-
guage
Luheng He, Mike Lewis and Luke Zettlemoyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
Name List Only? Target Entity Disambiguation in Short Texts
Yixin Cao, Juanzi Li, Xiaofei Guo, Shuanhu Bai, Heng Ji and Jie Tang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 654
Biography-Dependent Collaborative Entity Archiving for Slot Filling
Yu Hong, Xiaobin Wang, Yadong Chen, Jian Wang, Tongtao Zhang and Heng Ji . . . . . . . . . . . . . 665
Stochastic Top-k ListNet
Tianyi Luo, Dong Wang, Rong Liu and Yiqiao Pan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 676
Exploring Markov Logic Networks for Question Answering
Tushar Khot, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Eric Gribkoff, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter Clark and Oren
Etzioni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 685
Language and Domain Independent Entity Linking with Quantified Collective Validation
Han Wang, Jin Guang Zheng, Xiaogang Ma, Peter Fox and Heng Ji . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 695
Modeling Relation Paths for Representation Learning of Knowledge Bases
Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Huanbo Luan, Maosong Sun, Siwei Rao and Song Liu . . . . . . . . . . . . . 705
Corpus-level Fine-grained Entity Typing Using Contextual Information
Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh and Hinrich Schütze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 715
Knowledge Base Unification via Sense Embeddings and Disambiguation
Claudio Delli Bovi, Luis Espinosa Anke and Roberto Navigli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 726
Open-Domain Name Error Detection using a Multi-Task RNN
Hao Cheng, Hao Fang and Mari Ostendorf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 737
Extracting Relations between Non-Standard Entities using Distant Supervision and Imitation Learning
Isabelle Augenstein, Andreas Vlachos and Diana Maynard. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .747
Sieve-Based Spatial Relation Extraction with Expanding Parse Trees
Jennifer D’Souza and Vincent Ng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 758
Mr. Bennet, his coachman, and the Archbishop walk into a bar but only one of them gets recognized: On
The Difficulty of Detecting Characters in Literary Texts
Hardik Vala, David Jurgens, Andrew Piper and Derek Ruths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 769
Convolutional Sentence Kernel from Word Embeddings for Short Text Categorization
Jonghoon Kim, Francois Rousseau and Michalis Vazirgiannis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 775
lxiii
Predicting the Structure of Cooking Recipes
Jermsak Jermsurawong and Nizar Habash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 781
TSDPMM: Incorporating Prior Topic Knowledge into Dirichlet Process Mixture Models for Text Clus-
tering
Linmei Hu, Juanzi Li, Xiaoli Li, Chao Shao and Xuzhong Wang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 787
Sentence Modeling with Gated Recursive Neural Network
Xinchi Chen, Xipeng Qiu, Chenxi Zhu, Shiyu Wu and Xuanjing Huang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 793
Learning Timeline Difference for Text Categorization
Fumiyo Fukumoto and Yoshimi Suzuki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 799
Summarizing Topical Contents from PubMed Documents Using a Thematic Analysis
Sun Kim, Lana Yeganova and W John Wilbur . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 805
Recognizing Biographical Sections in Wikipedia
Alessio Palmero Aprosio and Sara Tonelli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 811
Learn to Solve Algebra Word Problems Using Quadratic Programming
Lipu Zhou, Shuaixiang Dai and Liwei Chen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 817
An Unsupervised Method for Discovering Lexical Variations in Roman Urdu Informal Text
Abdul Rafae, Abdul Qayyum, Muhammad Moeenuddin, Asim Karim, Hassan Sajjad and Faisal
Kamiran . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 823
Component-Enhanced Chinese Character Embeddings
Yanran Li, Wenjie Li, Fei Sun and Sujian Li . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 829
Multi-label Text Categorization with Joint Learning Predictions-as-Features Method
Li Li, Houfeng Wang, Xu Sun, Baobao Chang, Shi Zhao and Lei Sha . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 835
A Framework for Comparing Groups of Documents
Arun Maiya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 840
C3EL: A Joint Model for Cross-Document Co-Reference Resolution and Entity Linking
Sourav Dutta and Gerhard Weikum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 846
Joint Mention Extraction and Classification with Mention Hypergraphs
Wei Lu and Dan Roth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 857
FINET: Context-Aware Fine-Grained Named Entity Typing
Luciano Del Corro, Abdalghani Abujabal, Rainer Gemulla and Gerhard Weikum . . . . . . . . . . . . 868
Joint Entity Recognition and Disambiguation
Gang Luo, Xiaojiang Huang, Chin-Yew Lin and Zaiqing Nie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 879
How Much Information Does a Human Translator Add to the Original?
Barret Zoph, Marjan Ghazvininejad and Kevin Knight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .889
Hierarchical Recurrent Neural Network for Document Modeling
Rui Lin, Shujie Liu, Muyun Yang, Mu Li, Ming Zhou and Sheng Li . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 899
Auto-Sizing Neural Networks: With Applications to n-gram Language Models
Kenton Murray and David Chiang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 908
lxiv
Dual Decomposition Inference for Graphical Models over Strings
Nanyun Peng, Ryan Cotterell and Jason Eisner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 917
Discourse parsing for multi-party chat dialogues
Stergos Afantenos, Eric Kow, Nicholas Asher and Jérémy Perret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 928
Joint prediction in MST-style discourse parsing for argumentation mining
Andreas Peldszus and Manfred Stede . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 938
Feature-Rich Two-Stage Logistic Regression for Monolingual Alignment
Md Arafat Sultan, Steven Bethard and Tamara Sumner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 949
Semantic Role Labeling with Neural Network Factors
Nicholas FitzGerald, Oscar Täckström, Kuzman Ganchev and Dipanjan Das. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .960
RELLY: Inferring Hypernym Relationships Between Relational Phrases
Adam Grycner, Gerhard Weikum, Jay Pujara, James Foulds and Lise Getoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 971
Mise en Place: Unsupervised Interpretation of Instructional Recipes
Chloé Kiddon, Ganesa Thandavam Ponnuraj, Luke Zettlemoyer and Yejin Choi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 982
Semantic Framework for Comparison Structures in Natural Language
Omid Bakhshandeh and James Allen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 993
Sarcastic or Not: Word Embeddings to Predict the Literal or Sarcastic Meaning of Words
Debanjan Ghosh, Weiwei Guo and Smaranda Muresan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1003
Incorporating Trustiness and Collective Synonym/Contrastive Evidence into Taxonomy Construction
Tuan Luu Anh, Jung-jae Kim and See Kiong Ng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1013
Learning to Automatically Solve Logic Grid Puzzles
Arindam Mitra and Chitta Baral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1023
Improving fast_align by Reordering
Chenchen Ding, Masao Utiyama and Eiichiro Sumita . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1034
Touch-Based Pre-Post-Editing of Machine Translation Output
Benjamin Marie and Aurélien Max . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1040
A Discriminative Training Procedure for Continuous Translation Models
Quoc-Khanh DO, Alexandre Allauzen and François Yvon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1046
System Combination for Machine Translation through Paraphrasing
Wei-Yun Ma and Kathleen McKeown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1053
Hierarchical Incremental Adaptation for Statistical Machine Translation
Joern Wuebker, Spence Green and John DeNero . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1059
ReVal: A Simple and Effective Machine Translation Evaluation Metric Based on Recurrent Neural Net-
works
Rohit Gupta, Constantin Orasan and Josef van Genabith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1066
Investigating Continuous Space Language Models for Machine Translation Quality Estimation
Kashif Shah, Raymond W. M. Ng, Fethi Bougares and Lucia Specia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1073
lxv
Supervised Phrase Table Triangulation with Neural Word Embeddings for Low-Resource Languages
Tomer Levinboim and David Chiang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1079
Translation Invariant Word Embeddings
Kejun Huang, Matt Gardner, Evangelos Papalexakis, Christos Faloutsos, Nikos Sidiropoulos, Tom
Mitchell, Partha P. Talukdar and Xiao Fu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1084
Hierarchical Phrase-based Stream Decoding
Andrew Finch, Xiaolin Wang, Masao Utiyama and Eiichiro Sumita . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1089
Rule Selection with Soft Syntactic Features for String-to-Tree Statistical Machine Translation
Fabienne Braune, Nina Seemann and Alexander Fraser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1095
Motivating Personality-aware Machine Translation
Shachar Mirkin, Scott Nowson, Caroline Brun and Julien Perez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1102
Trans-gram, Fast Cross-lingual Word-embeddings
Jocelyn Coulmance, Jean-Marc Marty, Guillaume Wenzek and Amine Benhalloum . . . . . . . . . 1109
The Overall Markedness of Discourse Relations
Lifeng Jin and Marie-Catherine de Marneffe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1114
Experiments in Open Domain Deception Detection
Verónica Pérez-Rosas and Rada Mihalcea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1120
A model of rapid phonotactic generalization
Tal Linzen and Timothy O’Donnell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1126
Automatically Solving Number Word Problems by Semantic Parsing and Reasoning
Shuming Shi, Yuehui Wang, Chin-Yew Lin, Xiaojiang Liu and Yong Rui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1132
Parsing English into Abstract Meaning Representation Using Syntax-Based Machine Translation
Michael Pust, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin Knight, Daniel Marcu and Jonathan May . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1143
The Forest Convolutional Network: Compositional Distributional Semantics with a Neural Chart and
without Binarization
Phong Le and Willem Zuidema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1155
Alignment-Based Compositional Semantics for Instruction Following
Jacob Andreas and Dan Klein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1165
Do we need bigram alignment models? On the effect of alignment quality on transduction accuracy in
G2P
Steffen Eger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1175
Keyboard Logs as Natural Annotations for Word Segmentation
Fumihiko Takahasi and Shinsuke Mori . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1186
Long Short-Term Memory Neural Networks for Chinese Word Segmentation
Xinchi Chen, Xipeng Qiu, Chenxi Zhu, Pengfei Liu and Xuanjing Huang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1197
Semi-supervised Chinese Word Segmentation based on Bilingual Information
Wei Chen and Bo Xu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1207
lxvi
Hierarchical Back-off Modeling of Hiero Grammar based on Non-parametric Bayesian Model
Hidetaka Kamigaito, Taro Watanabe, Hiroya Takamura, Manabu Okumura and Eiichiro Sumita
1217
Consistency-Aware Search for Word Alignment
Shiqi Shen, Yang Liu, Maosong Sun and Huanbo Luan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1228
Graph-Based Collective Lexical Selection for Statistical Machine Translation
Jinsong Su, Deyi Xiong, Shujian Huang, Xianpei Han and Junfeng Yao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1238
Bilingual Correspondence Recursive Autoencoder for Statistical Machine Translation
Jinsong Su, Deyi Xiong, Biao Zhang, Yang Liu, Junfeng Yao and Min Zhang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1248
How to Avoid Unwanted Pregnancies: Domain Adaptation using Neural Network Models
Shafiq Joty, Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, Kamla Al-Mannai, Ahmed Abdelali and Stephan Vogel
1259
Detecting Content-Heavy Sentences: A Cross-Language Case Study
Junyi Jessy Li and Ani Nenkova . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1271
Search-Aware Tuning for Hierarchical Phrase-based Decoding
Feifei Zhai, Liang Huang and Kai Zhao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1282
Part-of-speech Taggers for Low-resource Languages using CCA Features
Young-Bum Kim, Benjamin Snyder and Ruhi Sarikaya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1292
An Improved Tag Dictionary for Faster Part-of-Speech Tagging
Robert Moore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1303
Improving Arabic Diacritization through Syntactic Analysis
Anas Shahrour, Salam Khalifa and Nizar Habash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1309
Combining Discrete and Continuous Features for Deterministic Transition-based Dependency Parsing
Meishan Zhang and Yue Zhang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1316
Efficient Inner-to-outer Greedy Algorithm for Higher-order Labeled Dependency Parsing
Xuezhe Ma and Eduard Hovy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1322
Online Updating of Word Representations for Part-of-Speech Tagging
Wenpeng Yin, Tobias Schnabel and Hinrich Schütze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1329
Empty Category Detection using Path Features and Distributed Case Frames
Shunsuke Takeno, Masaaki Nagata and Kazuhide Yamamoto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1335
Foreebank: Syntactic Analysis of Customer Support Forums
Rasoul Kaljahi, Jennifer Foster, Johann Roturier, Corentin Ribeyre, Teresa Lynn and Joseph Le
Roux. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1341
Semi-supervised Dependency Parsing using Bilexical Contextual Features from Auto-Parsed Data
Eliyahu Kiperwasser and Yoav Goldberg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1348
Improved Transition-Based Parsing and Tagging with Neural Networks
Chris Alberti, David Weiss, Greg Coppola and Slav Petrov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1354
Syntactic Parse Fusion
Do Kook Choe, David McClosky and Eugene Charniak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1360
lxvii
Not All Contexts Are Created Equal: Better Word Representations with Variable Attention
Wang Ling, Yulia Tsvetkov, Silvio Amir, Ramon Fermandez, Chris Dyer, Alan W Black, Isabel
Trancoso and Chu-Cheng Lin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1367
An Improved Non-monotonic Transition System for Dependency Parsing
Matthew Honnibal and Mark Johnson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1373
Improving Statistical Machine Translation with a Multilingual Paraphrase Database
Ramtin Mehdizadeh Seraj, Maryam Siahbani and Anoop Sarkar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1379
Learning Semantic Representations for Nonterminals in Hierarchical Phrase-Based Translation
Xing Wang, Deyi Xiong and Min Zhang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1391
A Comparison between Count and Neural Network Models Based on Joint Translation and Reordering
Sequences
Andreas Guta, Tamer Alkhouli, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Joern Wuebker and Hermann Ney . . . . . . 1401
Effective Approaches to Attention-based Neural Machine Translation
Thang Luong, Hieu Pham and Christopher D. Manning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1412
Document Modeling with Gated Recurrent Neural Network for Sentiment Classification
Duyu Tang, Bing Qin and Ting Liu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1422
Fine-grained Opinion Mining with Recurrent Neural Networks and Word Embeddings
Pengfei Liu, Shafiq Joty and Helen Meng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1433
Joint A* CCG Parsing and Semantic Role Labelling
Mike Lewis, Luheng He and Luke Zettlemoyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1444
Improving Semantic Parsing with Enriched Synchronous Context-Free Grammar
Junhui Li, Muhua Zhu, Wei Lu and Guodong Zhou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1455
Solving Geometry Problems: Combining Text and Diagram Interpretation
Minjoon Seo, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, Oren Etzioni and Clint Malcolm . . . . . . . . . . . 1466
Do You See What I Mean? Visual Resolution of Linguistic Ambiguities
Yevgeni Berzak, Andrei Barbu, Daniel Harari, Boris Katz and Shimon Ullman . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1477
Efficient and Expressive Knowledge Base Completion Using Subgraph Feature Extraction
Matt Gardner and Tom Mitchell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1488
Representing Text for Joint Embedding of Text and Knowledge Bases
Kristina Toutanova, Danqi Chen, Patrick Pantel, Hoifung Poon, Pallavi Choudhury and Michael
Gamon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1499
A Utility Model of Authors in the Scientific Community
Yanchuan Sim, Bryan Routledge and Noah A. Smith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1510
Finding Function in Form: Compositional Character Models for Open Vocabulary Word Representation
Wang Ling, Chris Dyer, Alan W Black, Isabel Trancoso, Ramon Fermandez, Silvio Amir, Luis
Marujo and Tiago Luis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1520
Syntax-Aware Multi-Sense Word Embeddings for Deep Compositional Models of Meaning
Jianpeng Cheng and Dimitri Kartsaklis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1531
lxviii
Conversation Trees: A Grammar Model for Topic Structure in Forums
Annie Louis and Shay B. Cohen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1543
Fast, Flexible Models for Discovering Topic Correlation across Weakly-Related Collections
Jingwei Zhang, Aaron Gerow, Jaan Altosaar, James Evans and Richard Jean So . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1554
Molding CNNs for text: non-linear, non-consecutive convolutions
Tao Lei, Regina Barzilay and Tommi Jaakkola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1565
Multi-Perspective Sentence Similarity Modeling with Convolutional Neural Networks
Hua He, Kevin Gimpel and Jimmy Lin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1576
Posterior calibration and exploratory analysis for natural language processing models
Khanh Nguyen and Brendan O’Connor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1587
A Generative Word Embedding Model and its Low Rank Positive Semidefinite Solution
Shaohua Li, Jun Zhu and Chunyan Miao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1599
Reading Documents for Bayesian Online Change Point Detection
Taehoon Kim and Jaesik Choi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1610
Recognizing Textual Entailment Using Probabilistic Inference
Lei Sha, Sujian Li, Baobao Chang, Zhifang Sui and Tingsong Jiang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1620
Chinese Semantic Role Labeling with Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Networks
Zhen Wang, Tingsong Jiang, Baobao Chang and Zhifang Sui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1626
Unsupervised Negation Focus Identification with Word-Topic Graph Model
Bowei Zou, Guodong Zhou and Qiaoming Zhu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1632
Reverse-engineering Language: A Study on the Semantic Compositionality of German Compounds
Corina Dima . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1637
Event Detection and Factuality Assessment with Non-Expert Supervision
Kenton Lee, Yoav Artzi, Yejin Choi and Luke Zettlemoyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1643
Large-Scale Acquisition of Entailment Pattern Pairs by Exploiting Transitivity
Julien Kloetzer, Kentaro Torisawa, Chikara Hashimoto and Jong-Hoon Oh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1649
Context-Dependent Knowledge Graph Embedding
Yuanfei Luo, Quan Wang, Bin Wang and Li Guo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1656
Learning to Identify the Best Contexts for Knowledge-based WSD
Evgenia Wasserman Pritsker, William Cohen and Einat Minkov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1662
Measuring Prerequisite Relations Among Concepts
Chen Liang, Zhaohui Wu, Wenyi Huang and C. Lee Giles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1668
Adapting Phrase-based Machine Translation to Normalise Medical Terms in Social Media Messages
Nut Limsopatham and Nigel Collier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1675
Script Induction as Language Modeling
Rachel Rudinger, Pushpendre Rastogi, Francis Ferraro and Benjamin Van Durme . . . . . . . . . . . 1681
Online Learning of Interpretable Word Embeddings
Hongyin Luo, Zhiyuan Liu, Huanbo Luan and Maosong Sun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1687
lxix
A Strong Lexical Matching Method for the Machine Comprehension Test
Ellery Smith, Nicola Greco, Matko Bosnjak and Andreas Vlachos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1693
Broad-coverage CCG Semantic Parsing with AMR
Yoav Artzi, Kenton Lee and Luke Zettlemoyer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1699
Semantically Conditioned LSTM-based Natural Language Generation for Spoken Dialogue Systems
Tsung-Hsien Wen, Milica Gasic, Nikola Mrkši
´
c, Pei-Hao Su, David Vandyke and Steve Young1711
Do Multi-Sense Embeddings Improve Natural Language Understanding?
Jiwei Li and Dan Jurafsky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1722
Learning Semantic Composition to Detect Non-compositionality of Multiword Expressions
Majid Yazdani, Meghdad Farahmand and James Henderson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1733
Solving General Arithmetic Word Problems
Subhro Roy and Dan Roth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1743
Distant Supervision for Relation Extraction via Piecewise Convolutional Neural Networks
Daojian Zeng, Kang Liu, Yubo Chen and Jun Zhao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1753
CORE: Context-Aware Open Relation Extraction with Factorization Machines
Fabio Petroni, Luciano Del Corro and Rainer Gemulla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1763
Improved Relation Extraction with Feature-Rich Compositional Embedding Models
Matthew R. Gormley, Mo Yu and Mark Dredze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1774
Classifying Relations via Long Short Term Memory Networks along Shortest Dependency Paths
Yan Xu, Lili Mou, Ge Li, Yunchuan Chen, Hao Peng and Zhi Jin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1785
A Computational Cognitive Model of Novel Word Generalization
Aida Nematzadeh, Erin Grant and Suzanne Stevenson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1795
Personality Profiling of Fictional Characters using Sense-Level Links between Lexical Resources
Lucie Flekova and Iryna Gurevych . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1805
Leave-one-out Word Alignment without Garbage Collector Effects
Xiaolin Wang, Masao Utiyama, Andrew Finch, Taro Watanabe and Eiichiro Sumita . . . . . . . . . 1817
Generalized Agreement for Bidirectional Word Alignment
Chunyang Liu, Yang Liu, Maosong Sun, Huanbo Luan and Heng Yu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1828
A Transition-based Model for Joint Segmentation, POS-tagging and Normalization
Tao Qian, Yue Zhang, Meishan Zhang, Yafeng Ren and Donghong Ji . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1837
Multilingual discriminative lexicalized phrase structure parsing
Benoit Crabbé. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1847
Hierarchical Low-Rank Tensors for Multilingual Transfer Parsing
Yuan Zhang and Regina Barzilay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1857
Diversity in Spectral Learning for Natural Language Parsing
Shashi Narayan and Shay B. Cohen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1868
Transition-based Dependency Parsing Using Two Heterogeneous Gated Recursive Neural Networks
Xinchi Chen, Yaqian Zhou, Chenxi Zhu, Xipeng Qiu and Xuanjing Huang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1879
lxx
Turn-taking phenomena in incremental dialogue systems
Hatim Khouzaimi, Romain Laroche and Fabrice Lefevre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1890
Hierarchical Latent Words Language Models for Robust Modeling to Out-Of Domain Tasks
Ryo Masumura, Taichi Asami, Takanobu Oba, Hirokazu Masataki, Sumitaka Sakauchi and Akinori
Ito . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1896
A Coarse-Grained Model for Optimal Coupling of ASR and SMT Systems for Speech Translation
Gaurav Kumar, Graeme Blackwood, Jan Trmal, Daniel Povey and Sanjeev Khudanpur . . . . . . 1902
Abstractive Multi-document Summarization with Semantic Information Extraction
Wei Li . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1908
Concept-based Summarization using Integer Linear Programming: From Concept Pruning to Multiple
Optimal Solutions
Florian Boudin, Hugo Mougard and Benoit Favre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1914
GhostWriter: Using an LSTM for Automatic Rap Lyric Generation
Peter Potash, Alexey Romanov and Anna Rumshisky . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1919
Better Summarization Evaluation with Word Embeddings for ROUGE
Jun-Ping Ng and Viktoria Abrecht . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1925
Krimping texts for better summarization
Marina Litvak, Mark Last and Natalia Vanetik . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1931
From the Virtual to the RealWorld: Referring to Objects in Real-World Spatial Scenes
Dimitra Gkatzia, Verena Rieser, Phil Bartie and William Mackaness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1936
An Unsupervised Bayesian Modelling Approach for Storyline Detection on News Articles
Deyu Zhou, Haiyang Xu and Yulan He . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1943
Topical Coherence for Graph-based Extractive Summarization
Daraksha Parveen, Hans-Martin Ramsl and Michael Strube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1949
Summarizing Student Responses to Reflection Prompts
Wencan Luo and Diane Litman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1955
Extractive Summarization by Maximizing Semantic Volume
Dani Yogatama, Fei Liu and Noah A. Smith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1961
LCSTS: A Large Scale Chinese Short Text Summarization Dataset
Baotian Hu, Qingcai Chen and Fangze Zhu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1967
Discourse Planning with an N-gram Model of Relations
Or Biran and Kathleen McKeown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1973
Experiments with Generative Models for Dependency Tree Linearization
Richard Futrell and Edward Gibson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1978
Summarization Based on Embedding Distributions
Hayato Kobayashi, Masaki Noguchi and Taichi Yatsuka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1984
Reversibility reconsidered: finite-state factors for efficient probabilistic sampling in parsing and gener-
ation
Marc Dymetman, Sriram Venkatapathy and Chunyang Xiao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1990
lxxi
A quantitative analysis of gender differences in movies using psycholinguistic normatives
Anil Ramakrishna, Nikolaos Malandrakis, Elizabeth Staruk and Shrikanth Narayanan . . . . . . . 1996
EMNLP versus ACL: Analyzing NLP research over time
Sujatha Das Gollapalli and Xiaoli Li . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2002
Answering Elementary Science Questions by Constructing Coherent Scenes using Background Knowl-
edge
Yang Li and Peter Clark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2007
WikiQA: A Challenge Dataset for Open-Domain Question Answering
Yi Yang, Wen-tau Yih and Christopher Meek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2013
Personalized Machine Translation: Predicting Translational Preferences
Shachar Mirkin and Jean-Luc Meunier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2019
Talking to the crowd: What do people react to in online discussions?
Aaron Jaech, Victoria Zayats, Hao Fang, Mari Ostendorf and Hannaneh Hajishirzi . . . . . . . . . . 2026
What Your Username Says About You
Aaron Jaech and Mari Ostendorf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2032
Knowledge Base Inference using Bridging Entities
Bhushan Kotnis, Pradeep Bansal and Partha P. Talukdar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2038
Specializing Word Embeddings for Similarity or Relatedness
Douwe Kiela, Felix Hill and Stephen Clark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2044
Evaluation of Word Vector Representations by Subspace Alignment
Yulia Tsvetkov, Manaal Faruqui, Wang Ling, Guillaume Lample and Chris Dyer . . . . . . . . . . . . 2049
Higher-order logical inference with compositional semantics
Koji Mineshima, Pascual Martínez-Gómez, Yusuke Miyao and Daisuke Bekki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2055
Any-language frame-semantic parsing
Anders Johannsen, Héctor Martínez Alonso and Anders Søgaard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2062
What’s in an Embedding? Analyzing Word Embeddings through Multilingual Evaluation
Arne Köhn. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2067
Joint Event Trigger Identification and Event Coreference Resolution with Structured Perceptron
Jun Araki and Teruko Mitamura. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2074
A Joint Dependency Model of Morphological and Syntactic Structure for Statistical Machine Translation
Rico Sennrich and Barry Haddow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2081
Variable-Length Word Encodings for Neural Translation Models
Rohan Chitnis and John DeNero . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2088
A Binarized Neural Network Joint Model for Machine Translation
Jingyi Zhang, Masao Utiyama, Eiichiro Sumita, Graham Neubig and Satoshi Nakamura . . . . . 2094
Bayesian Optimization of Text Representations
Dani Yogatama, Lingpeng Kong and Noah A. Smith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2100
lxxii
A Comparative Study on Regularization Strategies for Embedding-based Neural Networks
Hao Peng, Lili Mou, Ge Li, Yunchuan Chen, Yangyang Lu and Zhi Jin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2106
Efficient Hyper-parameter Optimization for NLP Applications
Lidan Wang, Minwei Feng, Bowen Zhou, Bing Xiang and Sridhar Mahadevan . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2112
Improved Arabic Dialect Classification with Social Media Data
Fei Huang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2118
Exploiting Debate Portals for Semi-Supervised Argumentation Mining in User-Generated Web Discourse
Ivan Habernal and Iryna Gurevych . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2127
Confounds and Consequences in Geotagged Twitter Data
Umashanthi Pavalanathan and Jacob Eisenstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2138
Modeling Reportable Events as Turning Points in Narrative
Jessica Ouyang and Kathleen McKeown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2149
Towards the Extraction of Customer-to-Customer Suggestions from Reviews
Sapna Negi and Paul Buitelaar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2159
Using Content-level Structures for Summarizing Microblog Repost Trees
Jing Li, Wei Gao, Zhongyu Wei, Baolin Peng and Kam-Fai Wong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2168
Intra-sentential Zero Anaphora Resolution using Subject Sharing Recognition
Ryu Iida, Kentaro Torisawa, Chikara Hashimoto, Jong-Hoon Oh and Julien Kloetzer . . . . . . . . 2179
Estimation of Discourse Segmentation Labels from Crowd Data
Ziheng Huang, Jialu Zhong and Rebecca J. Passonneau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2190
Comparing Word Representations for Implicit Discourse Relation Classification
Chloé Braud and Pascal Denis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2201
Better Document-level Sentiment Analysis from RST Discourse Parsing
Parminder Bhatia, Yangfeng Ji and Jacob Eisenstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2212
Closing the Gap: Domain Adaptation from Explicit to Implicit Discourse Relations
Yangfeng Ji, Gongbo Zhang and Jacob Eisenstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2219
Wikification of Concept Mentions within Spoken Dialogues Using Domain Constraints from Wikipedia
Seokhwan Kim, Rafael E. Banchs and Haizhou Li . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2225
Shallow Convolutional Neural Network for Implicit Discourse Relation Recognition
Biao Zhang, Jinsong Su, Deyi Xiong, Yaojie Lu, Hong Duan and Junfeng Yao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2230
On the Role of Discourse Markers for Discriminating Claims and Premises in Argumentative Discourse
Judith Eckle-Kohler, Roland Kluge and Iryna Gurevych . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2236
Fatal or not? Finding errors that lead to dialogue breakdowns in chat-oriented dialogue systems
Ryuichiro Higashinaka, Masahiro Mizukami, Kotaro Funakoshi, Masahiro Araki, Hiroshi Tsuka-
hara and Yuka Kobayashi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2243
Learning Word Meanings and Grammar for Describing Everyday Activities in Smart Environments
Muhammad Attamimi, Yuji Ando, Tomoaki Nakamura, Takayuki Nagai, Daichi Mochihashi, Ichiro
Kobayashi and Hideki Asoh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2249
lxxiii
Discourse Element Identification in Student Essays based on Global and Local Cohesion
Wei Song, Ruiji Fu, Lizhen Liu and Ting Liu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2255
Adapting Coreference Resolution for Narrative Processing
Quynh Ngoc Thi Do, Steven Bethard and Marie-Francine Moens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2262
Joint Lemmatization and Morphological Tagging with Lemming
Thomas Müller, Ryan Cotterell, Alexander Fraser and Hinrich Schütze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2268
Transducer Disambiguation with Sparse Topological Features
Gonzalo Iglesias, Adrià de Gispert and Bill Byrne . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2275
Arabic Diacritization with Recurrent Neural Networks
Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2281
Automatic Diacritics Restoration for Hungarian
Attila Novák and Borbála Siklósi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2286
Morphological Analysis for Unsegmented Languages using Recurrent Neural Network Language Model
Hajime Morita, Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2292
Can Symbol Grounding Improve Low-Level NLP? Word Segmentation as a Case Study
Hirotaka Kameko, Shinsuke Mori and Yoshimasa Tsuruoka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2298
When Are Tree Structures Necessary for Deep Learning of Representations?
Jiwei Li, Thang Luong, Dan Jurafsky and Eduard Hovy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2304
Discriminative Neural Sentence Modeling by Tree-Based Convolution
Lili Mou, Hao Peng, Ge Li, Yan Xu, Lu Zhang and Zhi Jin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2315
Multi-Timescale Long Short-Term Memory Neural Network for Modelling Sentences and Documents
Pengfei Liu, Xipeng Qiu, Xinchi Chen, Shiyu Wu and Xuanjing Huang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2326
Verbal and Nonverbal Clues for Real-life Deception Detection
Verónica Pérez-Rosas, Mohamed Abouelenien, Rada Mihalcea, Yao Xiao, CJ Linton and Mihai
Burzo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2336
Social Media Text Classification under Negative Covariate Shift
Geli Fei and Bing Liu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2347
Co-Training for Topic Classification of Scholarly Data
Cornelia Caragea, Florin Bulgarov and Rada Mihalcea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2357
Humor Recognition and Humor Anchor Extraction
Diyi Yang, Alon Lavie, Chris Dyer and Eduard Hovy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2367
Topic Identification and Discovery on Text and Speech
Chandler May, Francis Ferraro, Alan McCree, Jonathan Wintrode, Daniel Garcia-Romero and Ben-
jamin Van Durme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2377
A Dynamic Programming Algorithm for Computing N-gram Posteriors from Lattices
Dogan Can and Shrikanth Narayanan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2388
Bilingual Structured Language Models for Statistical Machine Translation
Ekaterina Garmash and Christof Monz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2398
lxxiv
Compact, Efficient and Unlimited Capacity: Language Modeling with Compressed Suffix Trees
Ehsan Shareghi, Matthias Petri, Gholamreza Haffari and Trevor Cohn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2409
ERSOM: A Structural Ontology Matching Approach Using Automatically Learned Entity Representation
Chuncheng Xiang, Tingsong Jiang, Baobao Chang and Zhifang Sui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2419
A Single Word is not Enough: Ranking Multiword Expressions Using Distributional Semantics
Martin Riedl and Chris Biemann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2430
Syntactic Dependencies and Distributed Word Representations for Analogy Detection and Mining
Likun Qiu, Yue Zhang and Yanan Lu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2441
Navigating the Semantic Horizon using Relative Neighborhood Graphs
Amaru Cuba Gyllensten and Magnus Sahlgren . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2451
Multi- and Cross-Modal Semantics Beyond Vision: Grounding in Auditory Perception
Douwe Kiela and Stephen Clark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2461
Automatic recognition of habituals: a three-way classification of clausal aspect
Annemarie Friedrich and Manfred Pinkal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2471
Distributed Representations for Unsupervised Semantic Role Labeling
Kristian Woodsend and Mirella Lapata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2482
A Tableau Prover for Natural Logic and Language
Lasha Abzianidze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2492
JEAM: A Novel Model for Cross-Domain Sentiment Classification Based on Emotion Analysis
Kun-Hu Luo, Zhi-Hong Deng, Hongliang Yu and Liang-Chen Wei . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2503
PhraseRNN: Phrase Recursive Neural Network for Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis
Thien Hai Nguyen and Kiyoaki Shirai . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2509
ASTD: Arabic Sentiment Tweets Dataset
Mahmoud Nabil, Mohamed Aly and Amir Atiya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2515
Adjective Intensity and Sentiment Analysis
Raksha Sharma, Mohit Gupta, Astha Agarwal and Pushpak Bhattacharyya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2520
The Rating Game: Sentiment Rating Reproducibility from Text
Lasse Borgholt, Peter Simonsen and Dirk Hovy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2527
A Multi-lingual Annotated Dataset for Aspect-Oriented Opinion Mining
Salud M. Jiménez-Zafra, Giacomo Berardi, Andrea Esuli, Diego Marcheggiani, María Teresa
Martín-Valdivia and Alejandro Moreo Fernández . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2533
Deep Convolutional Neural Network Textual Features and Multiple Kernel Learning for Utterance-level
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
Soujanya Poria, Erik Cambria and Alexander Gelbukh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2539
SLSA: A Sentiment Lexicon for Standard Arabic
Ramy Eskander and Owen Rambow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2545
Reinforcing the Topic of Embeddings with Theta Pure Dependence for Text Classification
Ning Xing, Yuexian Hou, Peng Zhang, Wenjie Li and Dawei Song . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2551
lxxv
That’s So Annoying!!!: A Lexical and Frame-Semantic Embedding Based Data Augmentation Approach
to Automatic Categorization of Annoying Behaviors using #petpeeve Tweets
William Yang Wang and Diyi Yang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2557
Detection of Steganographic Techniques on Twitter
Alex Wilson, Phil Blunsom and Andrew Ker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2564
#SupportTheCause: Identifying Motivations to Participate in Online Health Campaigns
Dong Nguyen, Tijs van den Broek, Claudia Hauff, Djoerd Hiemstra and Michel Ehrenhard . . 2570
An Analysis of Domestic Abuse Discourse on Reddit
Nicolas Schrading, Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm, Ray Ptucha and Christopher Homan . . . . . . . . . . . 2577
Twitter-scale New Event Detection via K-term Hashing
Dominik Wurzer, Victor Lavrenko and Miles Osborne . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2584
Classifying Tweet Level Judgements of Rumours in Social Media
Michal Lukasik, Trevor Cohn and Kalina Bontcheva . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2590
Identification and Verification of Simple Claims about Statistical Properties
Andreas Vlachos and Sebastian Riedel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2596
lxxvi
