Interactive Word Alignment for Language Engineering
Lars Ahrenberg, Magnus Merkel, Michael Petterstedt
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linkoping University
{lah,magme,g -micpel@ida.liu.se
Abstract
In this paper we report ongoing work on
developing an interactive word alignment
environment that will assist a user to
quickly produce accurate full-coverage
word alignment in bitexts for different
language engineering tasks, such as MT
lexicons and gold standards for evalua-
tion. The system uses a graphical inter-
face, static and dynamic resources as well
as machine learning techniques. We also
sketch how the system is being integrated
with an automatic word aligner.
1 Introduction
Automatic word alignment systems have proved
to be useful tools for various language and NLP
tasks, such as bilingual lexicon extraction for
lexicography, bilingual terminology and machine
translation. Although performance is improving,
(precision in the range from 80 to 95 per cent,
recall slightly above 50%), there are applications,
such as translation and the creation of gold stan-
dards, where these figures are not good enough.
Furthermore, since most automatic systems rely
on co-occurrence, rare correspondences go unno-
ticed, even though they may be relevant for ap-
plications such as terminology or lexicography.
This means that even for these applications
higher recall and precision will give better effect.
For machine translation errors in alignment are
likely to cause errors in translation. Thus, either
there will have to be a reviewing process when a
generated bilingual dictionary is to be part of a
MT system, or else the reviewing could be made
in the underlying files, i.e., by interactive review-
ing. Extending the application area to more lin-
guistic fields, such as translation studies or any
form of corpus-based linguistics, errors are of
course a curse. Also, observations and generalisa-
tions would be better grounded if they are com-
plete, i.e. all instances of the phenomena of
interest have been found and classified.
In this paper we present a system and a method
to improve the performance of word alignment,
by putting a human in the alignment loop.
Alignment bears resemblance to translation and,
as with translation, systems could improve by
learning from human decisions. Kay's argument
for the role of humans in translation holds for
alignment too; i.e., we should "expect better per-
formance of a system that allows human inter-
vention as opposed to one that will brook no
interference until all the damage has been done"
(Kay 1997, p 22).
An interactive approach to word alignment re-
quires an efficient interface to review, modify
and create alignments. The main features of our
system are that it proposes alignments to the user
on the basis of its resources and that it is able to
improve on its performance by learning from the
user sentence-by-sentence.
2 Previous work
Most word alignment systems that have been
presented to date are automatic, exploring the co-
occurrences of terms in large parallel corpora to
generate translational equivalences among word
types. In addition to co-occurrence data, some
systems employ linguistic knowledge of varying
levels of sophistication (Melamed 2001, Ahren-
berg et al., 2000b, Gaussier et al. 2000). Manual
word alignment with the support of interactive
tools has been used mainly for the creation of
gold standards for evaluation purposes (e.g.
Melamed, 2001; Veronis and Langlais, 2000;
Ahrenberg et al., 2000a). However, the idea of
improving the outcome of an automatic system,
though quite common with sentence aligners and
the creation of tree-banks (Marcus et al., 1993),
49
seems not to have been applied systematically to
word alignment. Isahara and Haruno (2000) pre-
sent a post-editing tool for sentence alignment
that has been extended with functions for align-
ment of phrases and proper nouns. In the Cairo
system (Smith and Jahr, 2000) a user can exam-
ine visualizations of the word alignments pro-
duced by a word aligner, but is not allowed to
make changes to them.
In Ahrenberg et al. (2002) an earlier version of
the interactive linker was presented. This version
had a more primitive interface and also lacked
several of the resource and learning capabilities
included in the current version.
3 I*Link — an interactive word aligner
The current version of l*Link supports the fol-
lowing tasks :1
•
Manual word alignment
• Automatic proposals of token alignments
• Reviewing and editing alignment propos-
als from the system in an orderly fashion,
• Configuring the resources to be used by
the system in a work session
• Compiling reports and statistics from
aligned files.
3.1 The I*Link workspace
The system has a graphical interface that allows
direct manipulation and interaction with static
and dynamic resources. The interface is divided
into four windows: the Link Panel, the Link Ta-
ble Panel, the Resource Panel and the Settings
Panel. In the Link Panel, where the current sen-
tence pair is shown, the user can manually select
correspondences, or interact with the automatic
proposals from the system that can be accepted or
rejected according to the user's preferences.
All alignments that are confirmed by the anno-
tator will be marked in corresponding colors in
the Link Panel. Furthermore, the alignments are
also visualized in a table representation in the
Link Table Panel. The workspace of I*Link in-
cluding the Link Panel, Resource panel and Link
Table Panel is shown in Figure 1.
1 Further information about Mink and downloads
can be found at http://www.ida.liu.se/—nlplabnink/.
I*Link supports different strategies for how to
select and present alignment proposals to the an-
notator. For example, the annotator can decide
that alignments should be presented from left to
right based on the source sentence, or that pro-
posals should be given based on the over-all
ranking of the alignments that 1* Link has made.
3.2 Input and Resources
The input to I*Link consists of parallel source
and target files which have been aligned on the
sentence level beforehand. Input files may be
numbered text files or annotated files in XML-
format. The annotation records linguistic infor-
mation on four levels: word form, base form,
part-of-speech with morphosyntactic features and
syntactic functions, such as subject, object, and
attribute, etc. Annotated files generally allow for
more sophisticated resources to be used and cre-
ated. In our project we use the FDG parser from
Connexor for linguistic analysis (Tapanainen &
Jarvinen 1997).
The Resource Panel displays the configuration
of active resources for an alignment project.
There are basically three types of resources
available in the current version: static resources,
dynamic resources and patterns. All types of re-
sources could in principle be used on the four
different levels of abstraction supported by the
system. Static resources are set up at the start of
the alignment project and do not change during
the session. Typical examples of static data are
bilingual term lists and core lexicons. Dynamic
resources on the other hand do change during the
session. The third type of resource used in Mink
are pattern resources. These resources define cor-
respondences for tokens such as cognates, num-
bers and punctuation characters.
3.3 Interactive alignment and learning
The learning approach taken in I*Link is based
on the fact that the dynamic resources are up-
dated incrementally during the manual revision
stage. Each time the user confirms a proposed
link the information inherent in the link is stored
in the different dynamic resources. The inflected
word forms will be added to the word form re-
sources and the base forms to the lemmatized
dynamic resources. Also, new information on
POS correspondences and syntactic functions
50
will be put in the dynamic resources. However, if
a user rejects a proposal this information is stored
as negative data in the dynamic resources on all
applicable levels. The updating of the dynamic
resources is made incrementally which means
that the new information is available immediately
for I*Link and can be applied when new propos-
als are made in the next sentence pair. In our own
tests, the improvements from the learning strate-
gies are clearly observable even after a rather
limited number of sentence revisions.
3.4 Analysis and reports
l*Link contains some additional tools for data
analysis. The Link Inspector functions like a fine-
grained bilingual concordance program in that it
is possible to define search criteria on all combi-
nations of representation levels, word form, base
form, POS and function. For example, one can
search for all alignments where a subject noun
corresponds to an object noun, an adjectival con-
struction corresponds to a verb construction, etc.
There are also inspectors for viewing, search-
ing and editing the static and dynamic resources
and a Link Reporter that can summarize and con-
figure the information in the database, including
compiling fine-grained concordances according
to the user's preferences.
4 Different alignments strategies
Word alignment can be used for a number of dif-
ferent applications and tasks, as mentioned in the
beginning of this paper. In some applications
word form correspondences (Eng: the soldiers-
Sw: soldaterna) are more important; in others
only the base forms are to be considered (soldier-
soldat). This means that decisions have to be
made on how to treat articles, prepositions and
other function words in the alignment process.
For instance, in the examples above, some kind
of consistent treatment of articles are called for;
when should they be part of an alignment, when
should they be treated as deletions, and when
should they be ignored. Guidelines that support a
specific purpose of word alignment are therefore
extremely important to guarantee consistency and
valid data across a whole alignment project.
4.1 Evaluation
In a small experiment the speed and consistency
of four I*Link users were measured. All subjects
were familiar with the system though the guide-
lines to be followed were explained and dis-
cussed in a prior session of only twenty minutes.
The number of created alignments per subject
and minute varied between 12.9 and 16.7 with
14.4 as a mean. 83.4% of the alignments were
common to all subjects. If null links were ig-
nored, these showing the greatest variation,
agreement rose to 90.4% for the three subjects
that were most consistent. Details on this evalua-
tion experiment can be found in Merkel et al.
(2003).
5 Extensions to PLink
The current version of I*Link is a stand-alone
word alignment tool that proposes token links
and interacts with the user. To improve speed we
are currently adding a fully automatic mode to
the system. The output from the automatic mode
can then be reviewed by the user interactively
The user will go through a subset of the auto-
matically generated links (for example the first
50 sentence pairs) and then the automatic com-
ponent will take over again and re-align every-
thing that has not been verified by the user, with
the aid of the new information stored in the dy-
namic resources.
A statistical component for I*Link has been
implemented that creates co-occurrence data as
static resources on the different description lev-
els. These resources will be utilised by both the
interactive and automatic components in I*Link
in the next version. Dynamic resources can also
be reused across alignment projects depending on
the text type.
References
Ahrenberg L., Merkel, M. Shgvall Hein, A. & J.
Tiedemann, 2000a. Evaluating Word Alignment
Systems. In Proc. of the Second International Con-
ference on Linguistic Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2000), Athens, Volume	 1255-1261.
Ahrenberg, L Andersson M, and M. Merkel, 2000b. A
knowledge-lite approach to word alignment.. In J.
Veronis (ed.) 2000: 97-116.
51
Bitext segment
enhetsbokstav Ima. ste orBod vara ansluten till  SOP/€111 	sarnma
Wheal. PRP
•
	;lust be connecter E. the netraark server 	INF NM
'drive I letter
Ahrenberg, Lars, Magnus Merkel, Mikael Andersson.
2002. A System for Incremental and Interactive
Word Linking. In Third International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, Las Pal-
mas, 485-490.
Gaussier, E, Hull, D. & S. AIt-Mokhtar, 2000. Term
alignment in use - Machine-aided human transla-
tion. In J. Veronis (ed.) 2000: 253-276.
Isahara, H. and Haruno, M. 2000. Japanese-English
aligned bilingual corpora. In Veronis, J. (ed.) 2000,
313-334.
Kay, M. 1997. The Proper Place of Man and Machine
in Language Translation. In Machine Translation
Volume 12, Nos. 1-2, 1997, 3-23 (reprint from
1980).
Marcus, M., B. Santorini and M. A. Marcinkiewicz,
1993. Building a Large Annotated Corpus for Eng-
lish: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(2): 313-330.
Melamed, I. D., 2001. Empirical Methods for Exploit-
ing Parallel Texts. Cambridge, MA, The MIT Press
2001.
Merkel, M., Petterstedt, M. and L Ahrenberg 2003.
Interactive Word Alignment for Corpus Linguitics.
To appear in the Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics
2003.
Smith, N. A. and M. E. Jahr, 2000. Cairo: An Align-
ment Visualization Tool. Second Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, Athens, 2000.
Vol 1:549-551.
Tapanainen, P. and T. Jârvinen, 1997. A non-
projective dependency parser. Proceedings of the
5th Conference on Applied Natural Aslin. E.J.,
1949. Photostat recording in library work. In Aslib
Proceedings, 1:49-52.
Veronis, J. (ed.). 2000. Parallel Text Processing:
Alignment and Use of Translation Corpora.
Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Veronis, J. and P Langlais, 2000. Evaluation of paral-
lel text alignment systems. In Veronis, J. (ed.)
2000, 369-388.
dp.oic_projecto.acc enu oneke.aum
File loots NAnclow Help
Link !Ohm Pawl - 	 Lase P20?131
FNULL_LINK, 171710-0,1
agave 	 I Tweet I gates 
drJ
lerressesr 	 car 	 17,2,1,2V
y. 	 du 	1712,11.
run 	 Mar,.
Nicrosint Amass 	 Moostel_Acs mewed_
Ton	 Du 	 rosordre
muit 	 rnSibi 	 mended
Too 	YarD 	Mancire
connected 	scold000 	mancire
ID 	 MN 	ll,NY
de network serer seriurn__ 	 men-rev
usom 	 rred 	 menerev
the same 	 s arrina 	 mericee
drive Eater 	 othelsbokslm maw.
Source completed 	 04  Tmget completed
Marl 	 !NAN
chive letter Wordform enhetebonstav
	
drive letter 	Rase 	adhets-boeestay
	
N NON-50 N.P401A-SD
	
PUS
	re.SG-4401,1
ati 'TN Function psomp
	 l—Pwm".11
	__J	 __J
L tit J 	Done J
Rusorcu Pawl
Open resource 	 DYNAMIC m
WORD FORM RASE POS FUNCTION
DYNIMOC msWordForm-micke-200 	 Current matches: 	 Am: .071 	 11 •
STATIC 	 TuT_cir97 	 'Carr ent matches: 	r 	I —s•
STATIC 	 norstein	 Current matches: .2_ Ininl oce_l 1111$ Er
PATTERN cognates 	 Current matches: e  410P LiisJ 114 El
PATTERN manhunt 	 Current matchem p gym Er
PATTERN punctuations 	 Current matches: 4i  AVM 	 lit [Jr
Figure 1. The I*Link interface, including the Link Pane  , the Link Table Panel and the Resource Panel. The Link
Panel displays the alignments by color-coding. The properties of the alignment in focus are displayed in the
lower part of the panel, with values for each description level. To the right of the properties the action buttons
are situated. All color-coded alignments are also shown in the Link Table Panel in the upper left corner.
52
