The key role of semantics in the development of large-scale grammars of
natural language
Valia Kordoni
Department of Computational Linguistics
University of Saarland
PO Box 15 11 50, D -66041 Saarbriicken, Germany
kordoni@coli.uni—sb.de
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to show
how large-scale (computational) gram-
mars of natural language benefit from
an organization of semantics which is
based on Minimal Recursion Semantics
(MRS; Copestake et al. (1999)). This
we are doing by providing an account
of valence alternations in German based
on MRS, showing how such an account
makes a computational grammar more
efficient and less complicated for the
grammar writer.
1 Introduction
The valence alternations in German that we focus
on in this paper are the ones involving direct inter-
nal arguments (i.e., objects) and indirect preposi-
tional complements: NP k V NP, 113 NP3 1 NP k
V NP3 [P NP 2 ], where the indices denote referen-
tial identity.
Such alternation patterns in German character-
ize among others the behaviour of verbal predi-
cates which participate in the so-called Locative
Alternation phenomena.
2 Locative Alternation in German:
Overview
2.1 The verbs giefien and fallen
Consider the following sentences in German:
(1) Peter gof3 die Blumen mit Wasser.
Peter poured the flowers.A with water
"Peter watered the flowers".
(2) Peter goB Wasser auf die Blumen.
(3) Peter fiillte den Tank (mit Wasser).
Peter.N filled the tank.A (with water)
"Peter filled the tank (with water)".
(4) Peter fiillte Wasser in den Tank.
(1)-(4) are examples of German predicates
which participate in the so-called Locative alterna-
tion phenomena (see among others Dowty (1991),
Rappaport and Levin (1988), Levin and Rap apport
Hovav (1991)). Alternations in German with the
locative verbs fallen (fill) and giefien (pour) are
of the general form presented in Section (1). The
main features of these verbs in German (English,
Modern Greek, and some other languages) is that
they are morphologically identical and that they
involve two arguments: one denoting a location
and one denoting the locatum (die Blumen (flow-
ers)Iden Tank (tank) and Wasser (water), respec-
tively, in (1)-(4) above).
2.2 Removal Predicates
The removal predicates in German also take loca-
turn and location arguments and they are distin-
guished in the following groups:
1. Predicates (like leeren/entleeren (empty))
which imply a change of state of the loca-
tion argument when it is realized as the direct
object of the verb:
(5) Peter leerte den Tank.
Peter.N emptied the tank.A
"Peter emptied the tank".
(6) Peter leerte das Wasser aus dem Tank.
Peter emptied the water.A from the tank
"Peter emptied the water from the tank".
111
2. Predicates which denote a contact with the lo-
cation, as well as a change of location. These
predicates may also specify the manner or
the instrument related to the action of mov-
ing (wischen (wipe)). wischen does not admit
a von-PP (of/from-PP) complement when its
location argument is realized as the direct ob-
ject (example (7)). In this case wischen does
not entail the existence of a locatum argu-
ment. For instance, the act of wiping a board
does not necessarily result in wiping some-
thing off it.
(7) *Peter wischte die Tafel 	 von Kreide.
Peter.N wiped the board.A from chalk
Peter wiped the board of chalk".
(8) Peter wischte die Kreide von der Tafel.
Peter.N wiped the chalk.A from the board
"Peter wiped the chalk from the board".
3. saubern (trim) is different than wischen
(wipe), though, in the sense that "trim-
ming an object" necessarily means "trimming
something off this object":
(9) Peter sauberte den Busch von trockenen
Peter.N trimmed the bush.A of dry
Asten.
branches
"Peter trimmed the bush of dry branches".
2.3 Impingement Predicates
A typical impingement verb in German is schla-
gen (hit). According to Dowty (1991), the verb
hit (in English) does not imply any change of state
for any of its arguments which may surface syn-
tactically as direct object. The same semantic en-
tailments also hold for the German verb schlagen.
schlagen is an assymetric predicate in that when
the location argument is realized as the direct ob-
ject of the predicate the locatum argument is op-
tional, but when the locatum argument is realized
as the direct object all arguments are obligatory.
(10) Peter schlagt den Gong (mit dem KlOppel).
Peter.N hits	 the gong.A (with the clapper)
"Peter hits the gong with the clapper".
(11) Peter schlagt den KlOppel gegen den Gong.
Peter.N hits	 the clapper.A against the gong
"Peter hits the clapper against the gong".
(12) *Peter schlagt den KlOppel.
For verbs in the schlagen (hit) subclass of Ger-
man, the mit (with) alternant (example (10)) en-
tails that one of the arguments (i.e., the locatum)
is understood as the instrument ("means") which
is used by the actor in order to perform the action
denoted by the verb. The "gegen" (against) alter-
nant (see example (11)), on the other hand, entails
that the locatum undergoes directed motion.
3 Locative Alternation in German: The
Analysis
The account we suggest here for locative alter-
nation in German (see examples in Section (2)
above) follows the proposal of Koenig and Davis
(2000) for valence alternations, including locative
alternation in English. Their analysis is based on a
minimal recursion approach to semantic represen-
tation and is formalized using the Minimal Recur-
sion Semantics (MRS) framework of Copestake et
al. (1999). In brief, Minimal Recursion Seman-
tics is a framework for computational semantics,
in which the meaning of expressions is represented
as a flat bag of Elementary Predications (or EPs)
encoded as values of a LISZT attribute. The deno-
tation of this bag is equivalent to the logical con-
junction of its members. Scope relations between
EPs are represented as explicit relations among
EPs. Such scope relations can also be underspeci-
fied. The assumption of current MRS is that each
lexical item (other than those with empty EP bags)
has a single distinguished main EP, which is re-
ferred to as the KEY EP. All other EPs share a label
with the KEY EP. According to Koenig and Davis
(2000), for situation-denoting EPs, which are also
most interesting for our purposes here, the follow-
ing generalizations hold: (i) EPs do not encode
recursively embedded state-of-affairs (SOAs); (ii)
EPs can have one, two, or three arguments; (iii)
if an EP has three arguments, then one of them is
a state-of-affairs, and another is an undergoer co-
indexed with an argument of the embedded state-
of-affairs. Finally, as far as direct arguments are
concerned, in Koenig and Davis (2000) these are
predicted to link off the value of the KEY attribute.
3.1 The verbs giefien and fallen
Following the lexical list hypothesis of Koenig and
Davis (2000), according to which lexical items in-
112
SOA
 [ch-oploc-relFIG CI
SOA [ch-of-loc-relFIG CI
SOA [ch-of-st-rel]UND fri
[
mit-rdl
ACT
UND
SOA
CI
II
elude more than one EPs in their semantic content,
but lexically they select only one of these EPs as
their KEY, we propose that the semantic proper-
ties of the arguments of the verb giefien (water) in
example (1) of Section (2.1) above are captured by
the following semantic type:
(13) CONTENT value of giefienm it
-giefien-ch-ofst-rel -
ACT A (Peter)
UND p (die Blumen)
SOA [ch-of-st-relUND
ACT
LISZT ( II
CI
(13) above captures that the mit (with) alternant of
the German locative verb giefien (example (1)) de-
notes situations that must be both changes of state
and changes of location.
The locative alternant of the verb giefien (ex-
ample (2) of Section (2.1)) denotes only a simple
change of location. This is captured by the follow-
ing semantic type:
(14) CONTENT value of gie.fienio,
-giefien-ch-of-loc-rel - -
ACT II (Peter)
KEY El UND (Wasser)
LISZT (
The analysis presented above holds also for both
alternants of the verb fallen (fill; examples (3)
and (4) in Section (2.1)). One clarification is due
here concerning the mit (with) alternant of the verb
fiillen (example (3) of Section (2.1)), where the PP
(mit Wasser) appears to be optional: we assume
that the PP carries existential import, even when it
is not syntactically overt.
3.2 Removal Predicates
In the spirit of the MRS-based analysis for the
German verbs gieflen and fi,illen that we have pre-
sented above, we propose that the semantic prop-
erties of the arguments of one of the most repre-
sentative verbs of the removal predicates class in
German, the verb wischen (wipe), which denotes
a change of location, when a locatum argument
is realized as its direct object (see example (8) in
Section (2.2)), are captured by the following type:
(15) CONTENT value of wischen ioc
wischen-ch-of-loc-rel
ACT U (Peter)
UND El (die Kreide)
LISZT El)
-
saubern (trim; see example (9) in Section (2.2)
and (16) below) is different than wischen:
(16) CONTENT value of stiubernvon
sdubem-ch-of-st-rel -
ACT U (Peter)
UND (den Busch)
-sattbem-ch-of-loc-rer
ACT
LISZT (
SOA [ch-of-loc-relFIG El
That is, as (16) above captures, in German trim-
ming necessarily results in trimming something
off something else; in the case of example (9)
above trimming the bush results in trimming the
dry branches off the bush. And this is what the
semantic type in (16) captures.
3.3 Impingement Predicates
In order to capture the semantic properties of the
arguments of the most representative verb of the
impingement predicates class in German, the verb
schlagen (hit) in examples (10)-(12) above, we
propose the semantic types in (17) and (18), which
are in the spirit of the MRS-based analysis that we
have presented for the verbs giefien and fiillen and
for the removal predicates in German.
(17) and (18) capture that the German impinge-
ment verb schlagen (hit) is an assymetric predi-
cate in that when the location argument is real-
ized as the direct object of the predicate the loca-
tum argument might be optional (see SOA (El) in
(18)), but when the locatum argument is realized
as the direct object all arguments are obligatory
KEY El
SOA [ch-of-loc-relFIG
UND (Wasser)
KEY El
KEY 11
11
 ' [
von-rdl
ACT
SOA
UND
El
CI
UND El (Asten)
113
ElSOA
El El
El
LISZT (
[
gegen rel
ACT
UND
S OA
El
-schl-dmtc-rel
ACT
UND
ACT II (Peter)
UND El (den Kliippel)
(18) CONTENT value of schlagehmit
[schlagen-rel
ACT a (Peter)
UND gi (den Gong)
ElKEY
ElKEY
II
(Kliippel)
[
contact-rdl
ACT
UND
SOA (El)
_
ACT
CIUND
ElLISZT
CIElSOA II
[
directedinotion_to_contact-rel
CIFIG
GRND (den Gong)
SOA
 [dmtc-relFIGGRNDEl
(see (17)). (17) and (18) also capture that the mit
(with) alternant of the German impingement verb
schlagen (hit) (see example (10)) entails that one
of the verbal arguments, i.e., the locaturn, is under-
stood as the instrument which is used by the actor
in order to perform the action denoted by the verb,
while the other alternant (see example (11)) entails
that the location undergoes directed motion; it is
moved by the actor into contact with the location.
(17) CONTENT value of sch/agendmtc l ' 2
schlagen-directed_motion_to_contact-rel
immediate consequence, (the lexicon of) a large-
scale computational grammar of German, like the
one described in Miiller and Kasper (2000), may
become even more efficient, since it needs to de-
pend on fewer or even no lexical rules at all, and
thus less complicated for the grammar writer to
maintain, as well as to develop further (NB: this
is not incompatible at all with the ideas expressed
in Copestake (2002) about the organization of the
lexicon in an LKB grammar). Here we focussed
on (some of) the theoretical assumptions upon
which the achievement of such a goal can be based
realistically. A presentation of the technical details
of the LKB implementation of the grammar frag-
ment that we have described above, which practi-
cally does not differ much from what we have pre-
sented in the types of Section (3), is not included
here due to lack of space, but is available for the
presentation of the paper.
4 Conclusions and Outlook
As a final general comment we need to under-
line that the MRS-based analysis we have pre-
sented in Section (3) above allows for a linguisti-
cally motivated account of the syntactic properties
of apparent semantic doublets (i.e., what we have
called "valence alternants"), which avoids the pro-
cessing load problems that are inseparable from
(directional or even bi-directional a la Flickinger
(1987)) lexical rule approaches to verbal alterna-
tions in particular and to development of (the lex-
icon of) large-scale computational grammars of
natural language based on HPSG in general. As an
I dmtc stands for directed_motion_to_contact.
2FIG(URE) denotes the moving entity (locatum); GRND
(GROUND) denotes the contacted location.
References
Ann Copestake, Dan Flickinger, Ivan A. Sag, and
Carl J. Pollard. 1999. Minimal Recursion Seman-
tics: An Introduction. Ms., Stanford University.
Ann Copestake. 2002. Implementing Typed Feature
Structure Grammars. CSLI Lecture Notes, Number
110. Standord: CSLI Publications.
David Dowty. 1991. Thematic Proto-Roles and Argu-
ment Selection. Language, 67:547-619.
Daniel Flickinger. 1987. Lexical Rules in the Hier-
archical Lexicon. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University,
California.
Jean-Pierre Koenig and Anthony R. Davis. 2000. The
KEY to Lexical Semantics. Paper presented at the
7th International Conference on Head-Driven Phrase
Structure Grammar, held on July 22-23,2000 as part
of the Berkeley Formal Grammar Conference 2000.
Beth Levin and Malka Rappaport Hovav. 1991. Wip-
ing the Slate Clean: A Lexical Semantic Explo-
ration. In Beth Levin and Steven Pinker, editors,
Lexical and Conceptual Semantics, pages 123-152.
Blackwell, Cambridge MA and Oxford UK.
Stefan Miiller and Walter Kasper. 2000. HPSG Analy-
sis of German. In Wolfgang Wahlster, editor, Verb-
mobil: Foundations of Speech-to-Speech Transla-
tion, pages 238-253. Springer.
Malka Rappaport and Beth Levin. 1988. What to do
with 0-roles. In Wendy Wilkins, editor, Thematic
Relations. Syntax and Semantics 2/, pages 7-36.
Academic Press Inc.
114
