Rule-based lexical modelling
of foreign-accented pronunciation variants
Stefan Schaden
Institute of Communication Acoustics
Ruhr-Universitat Bochum
D-44780 Bochum, Germany
schaden@ika.rub.de
Abstract
This paper describes a novel approach to
generate potential foreign-accented pho-
netic transcriptions using phonological re-
write rules. For each pair of a native lan-
guage (Li) and a target language (L2), a
set of postlexical rules is designed to trans-
form canonical phonetic dictionaries of L2
into adapted dictionaries for native Li
speakers. Some general considerations on
the design of such a rule-based system are
presented.
1 Introduction
Pronunciation dictionaries are a crucial component
of speech recognition and speech synthesis sys-
tems, as they form the link between the acoustic
and symbolic level of automatic speech and lan-
guage processing. Typically, each entry in a lexi-
con is assigned a phonetic transcription that repre-
sents its canonical form, i.e. its standard
pronunciation in the language the system is de-
signed for.
Canonical lexicons, however, have the general
drawback that every marked deviation from the
standard form will lead to a mismatch between
lexicon transcription and actual pronunciation. In
This study was carried out at the Institute of Communication
Acoustics, Ruhr-University Bochum (Prof. J. Blauert, PD U.
Jekosch). It is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG).
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), this may
cause a significant decline of the recognition per-
formance.
In recent years, a number of approaches to com-
pensate for this mismatch by various lexical adap-
tation techniques have been proposed (for an over-
view see Strik, 2001), e.g. by adding alternative
pronunciation variants to the lexicon, by generat-
ing these variants using phonological rules, or by
building pronunciation networks. Usually these
techniques are applied to model frequently occur-
ring stylistic variations such as within-word or
cross-word assimilations or elisions in informal
speech.
It is the aim of our current research to extend the
lexicon adaptation approach from intra-lingual
variation to the domain of foreign-accented pro-
nunciation. Non-native speakers frequently pro-
duce variants that deviate markedly from the ca-
nonical form. They are characterized by
phenomena such as changes in allophonic realiza-
tions, phoneme shifts, word stress shifts, or alter-
nations in syllable structure caused by epenthesis
or deletion of speech sounds. A primary (though
not the only) source of these mispronunciations is
a transfer of phonetic elements and rules from the
speaker's native language onto the target language.
The idea to model these errors by lexicon adap-
tation is based on the assumption that for each lan-
guage direction — i.e. a pair of a native language
(Li) and a target language (L2) — a number of
characteristic pronunciation errors can be identi-
fied. Although there is a considerable range of in-
ter-individual variation even for speakers with the
same native language background (due to variables
159
such as L2 proficiency, age, education, dialectal
origin, etc.), it is assumed that common mispro-
nunciations can be formulated as rewrite rules to
generate prototypical interlanguage transcriptions.
Currently, the languages investigated are Ger-
man (GER), English (ENG), and French (FR) in dif-
ferent Ll/L2 combinations; an extension to addi-
tional languages is envisaged.
A prototype of a task-specific rule interpreter
was implemented, and phonological rule sets for
the language directions ENG GER, GER FR,
GER ENG, and FR GER were developed and
are constantly being updated and modified. These
rules are based on actual pronunciation variants
observed in a non-native speech database (see be-
low). They are currently limited to the domain of
foreign city names; yet it is expected that the find-
ings can be generalized to other lexical domains.
2 Speech data
For the purposes of this research project, a speech
database of non-native speech was built up. The
data collection and the experimental setting for the
recordings are described in full detail in Schaden
(2002). It includes non-native pronunciation vari-
ants of city names/town names from five European
languages (English, German, French, Italian and
Dutch) spoken by native speakers of English,
German, French, Italian, and Spanish. In order to
account for potential inter-speaker variability, at
least 20 speakers per native language were re-
corded. The recordings included both a reading
task and a repetition task, using the same words for
both tasks. This allows to spot the particular influ-
ence of spelling pronunciation on the production of
the speakers.
3 Inter-speaker variability
As a general prerequisite for modelling pronuncia-
tion variation of any kind — be it speaker-specific,
dialectal, or foreign-accented —, knowledge about
the target forms to be modelled is required: For
obvious reasons, pronunciation rules can only be
established after having specified the target rule
output. The required knowledge can either be in-
ferred from speech data or extracted from the lit-
erature.
However, contrary to intra-lingual (e.g. dialectal
or stylistic) variants, which are relatively well
documented, the definition of appropriate target
forms is not as straightforward in the case of non-
native speech. A primary reason for this is the he-
terogeneity of the speaker group: While e.g. in
dialectal speech, phoneme shifts and other devia-
tions from the standard are relatively consistent
over large speaker groups, foreign-accented pro-
nunciations will vary considerably according to in-
dividual speaker characteristics (some of which
were mentioned above). Although it is certainly
possible to detect prevalent pronunciation errors
for speakers of the same Li, a common native lan-
guage background does not constitute a homo-
genuous non-native speaker group. It is therefore
not adequate to model variants for a particular
Ll/L2 combination by adding just one single pro-
totypical Li-specific variant for each L2 lexicon
item. Rather, there is a continuum of potential
mispronunciations ranging from slightly accented
forms with only minor allophonic shifts up to
heavily accented pronunciations with extreme de-
viations from the L2 standard.
4 Prototypical accent levels
In order to model inter-speaker variability, it is not
a practical aim to take all potential variants into
account. Instead, a different approach is pursued:
As a working hypothesis, it is suggested to break
up the continuum into discrete categories by de-
fining a number of prototypical foreign-accented
pronunciations per word, where each of these pro-
totypes represents a particular accent level. Accent
levels range from near-native pronunciation to
gross mispronunciations. Currently, the model is
based on four accent levels, where higher integers
indicate increasing deviations from the canonical
L2 pronunciation:
160
Accent
level
Description
AL 0 Canonical L2 pronunciation (no accent)
AL 1 AL 0 + Minor allophonic deviations
AL 2 AL 1 + Allophone/phoneme substitutions
AL 3 AL 2 + Partial transfer of L1 spelling pronunciation
(GTP correspondences) to L2
AL 4 Almost full transfer of L1 spelling pronunciation to
L2
Table 1: Accent levels
Accordingly, the rule system is built up in such
a way that for each input word, multiple variants
representing the accent level prototypes can be
generated. By this, the probability that one of the
automatically generated variants approximates the
actually observed pronunciation is increased. It is
expected that for speech synthesis and recognition
purposes, a sufficient approximation to actually
occurring variants can be achieved in this way.
Furthermore, it is attempted to design a modular
rule system that operates incrementally, as indi-
cated above in Table 1: Each rule module models a
specific accent level, and a sequential application
of the modules should ideally generate phonetic
forms of increasing accent degrees.
5 Modelling phoneme substitutions
It is one of the most salient characteristics of for-
eign-accented pronunciation that non-native
speakers tend to substitute L2 speech sounds by
similar, yet not identical Li equivalents. The first
idea that suggests itself in order to model these
substitutions are phoneme/allophone mapping ta-
bles that replace particular L2 sounds by similar
speech sounds from the Li inventory. However,
simple context-free phoneme mapping is problem-
atic in at least two respects:
First, for many L2 sounds it is not clear what the
'best' Li equivalent is. Acoustic or articulatory
proximity of an L1/L2 allophone pair is not always
a reliable predictor of the sound shifts that speak-
ers actually produce. Secondly, our data clearly in-
dicates that in many cases, the choice of the sub-
stitution phoneme/allophone is related to the
phonetic or graphemic surroundings of the substi-
tuted phoneme. Therefore, in order to restrict their
application to appropriate contexts, most rewrite
rules require context conditions on the phoneme
level and/or on the orthographic level (see below).
5.1 Phonemic context conditions
Rules that do not require information from linguis-
tic levels other than the phoneme/allophone level
can be formulated using the established rule nota-
tion adopted from generative phonology:
XL2 YLI / LC RC
Here, a phoneme/allophone XL2 (element of the
L2 inventory) is substituted by YLI (element of the
Li inventory) if the immediate left and right con-
texts LC and RC are valid. In the rule system pre-
sented here, X and Y are usually phoneme or allo-
phone segments. In cases where a rule applies to
entire phoneme classes, X and Y (likewise LC and
RC) can also be written as phonetic feature arrays:
+obstruent 1 r+ obstruent
	
+ voiced 	 —voiced
This is a useful abbreviatory device if a gener-
alizable phonological rule of Li is transferred to
L2 (e.g. the German rule of final obstruent de-
voicing applied to English).
5.2 Graphemic constraints
In the particular case of read speech, mispronun-
ciations by non-natives are often triggered by a
projection of Li grapheme-phoneme correspon-
dences to L2. Here, speakers apply letter-to-sound
rules of their native language to L2, provided that
L2 target words contain orthographic sequences
that allow such a transfer.
One technique to model this particular error type
is the application of Ll grapheme-to-phoneme
(GTP) converters to L2 orthographic input. This
approach was explored e.g. by Cremelie & ten
Bosch (2001) in a speech recognition experiment
in the proper names domain. But although GTP
conversion by Li rules proved to be beneficial in
this recognition scenario, it does not model speaker
behavior adequately, since non-native pronuncia-
161
tion variants are rarely based on unmodified Li
GTP rules applied to L2. There are various reasons
for this: Many speakers have an awareness of at
least some pronunciation rules of L2 (e.g. the pro-
nunciation of German <sch> as 1S1 is familiar to
many European speakers). Secondly, for some L2
orthographic sequences, a straight transfer of Ll
GTP rules would yield `unpronouncable' clusters;
hence the Li rules can only be applied to parts of
the L2 grapheme string.
As an alternative to letter-to-sound conversion
by Li rules, where the entire string is globally
transcribed according to Li letter-to-sound rules, it
is therefore suggested to apply graphemically con-
strained phoneme substitutions in order to model
spelling pronunciation errors locally. In this rule
type, phoneme substitutions are tied to particular
graphemic representations. For example, native
English speakers frequently mispronounce German
1v1 as 1w1. This substitution, however, only occurs
if 1171 is orthographically represented by <w>,
while 1v1 represented by orthographic <v> fails to
undergo this rule. Such a restriction can be for-
malized as follows:
PHONEME LAYER:	 [V]	 [w]
GRAPHEME LAYER: <W>
For this rule type, it is required that the phoneme
string is aligned with the grapheme string in order
to map each phoneme correctly to the grapheme
segment or cluster representing it. A rule-based
grapheme-phoneme alignment module for English,
German, and French is therefore included in the
presented rule system.
According to the experience gained up to now,
graphemically constrained substitution rules are
capable of modelling a wide range of typical
spelling pronunciation errors adequately — from in-
significant misreadings up to strongly accented
variants that follow almost completely the Li let-
ter-to-sound-rules. Furthermore, this approach has
the advantage over GTP conversion by Li rules
that all errors (reading errors included) can be
modelled postlexically without interfering with the
canonical input lexicon.
6 Summary, future extensions
In its present status, the rule system outlined in the
previous sections includes sets of postlexical ac-
cent rules for English, French, and German in all
Li/L2 combinations. Currently, the number of
rules per language direction is 80-100. The rules
generate several prototypical foreign-accented
variants per input word, using phoneme substitu-
tion rules of the type described above.
Future extensions of the rule system will focus
on two issues: (i) Modelling shifts in word stress
patterns that can frequently be observed in non-
native pronunciation variants (L1 stress patterns
transferred to L2); (ii) the role of morphemes and
lexemes which are part of the learned vocabulary
(of speakers with some L2 proficiency). The data
indicates that these elements (e.g. -stein or -bach in
German city names) are less susceptible to ac-
cented pronunciation and may thus escape the ef-
fects of the phoneme substitution rules. Further-
more, an extension to additional (native and target)
languages is scheduled. Rule sets for Italian (as Li
and L2) and Dutch (as L2 only) will be set up.
For an evaluation of the automatically generated
pronunciation variants, a comparison to the pro-
nunciations of new (i.e. non-database) speakers as
well as speech recognizer performance tests using
the adapted dictionaries will be essential.
References
Cremelie, N. and L. ten Bosch. 2001. Improving the
Recognition of Foreign Names and Non-Native
Speech by Combining Multiple Grapheme-to-
Phoneme Converters. Proceedings ISCA ITRW
Workshop 'Adaptation Methods for Speech Recogni-
tion', Sophia Antipolis, France [on CD-ROM].
Schaden, S. 2002. A Database for the Analysis of
Cross-Lingual Pronunciation Variants of European
City Names. Proceedings Third International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2002), Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain,
Vol. 4, 1277-1283.
Strik, H.. 2001. Pronunciation Adaptation at the Lexical
Level. Proceedings ISCA ITRW Workshop 'Adapta-
tion Methods for Speech Recognition', Sophia An-
tipolis, France [on CD-ROM].
162
