Producing Contextually Appropriate Intonation
in an Information-State Based Dialogue System
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova i
 Stina Ericsson2 Kepa J. Rodriguez' Elena Karagjosova l
'University of the Saarland, Germany 	 2University of Gothenburg, Sweden
fkorbay,kepa,elkal@coli.uni -sb.de 	 stinae@ling.gu.se
Abstract
Our goal is to improve the contextual
appropriateness of spoken output in a
dialogue system. We explore the use of
the information state to determine the
information structure of system utter-
ances. We concentrate on the realiza-
tion of information structure by into-
nation. We present the results of eval-
uating the contextual appropriateness
of varied system output produced with
a text-to-speech synthesis system that
supports intonation annotation.
1 Introduction
Most commercial spoken dialogue systems use
carefully scripted dialogues. This has the advan-
tage that the system output can be pre-recorded
and have high quality. The disadvantage is lim-
ited dialogue flexibility, as user-initiative must be
restricted to ensure the dialogue adheres to the
script. More flexible dialogues need dynamically
produced output. As the range of possible system
utterances grows pre-recording becomes infeasi-
ble, and speech synthesis becomes necessary.
One challenge for systems using synthesized
speech is the generation of contextually appro-
priate intonation. With dynamically produced
output, the same sequence of words may appear
in different contexts, possibly needing different
intonation. For example, the intonation of an an-
swer needs to correspond to the respective ques-
tion: whereas in (1S) the nuclear intonation cen-
ter has a "default" placement, in (2S) it does not. I
(1) U: What is the status of the stove?
S: The stove is switched ON.
H* LL%
(2) U: Which device is switched on?
S: The STOVE is switched on.
H* 	 LL%
Contextually inappropriate intonation may have
negative effect on intelligibility or even lead to
confusion; for example, when (1U) is answered
with (2S), or (2U) with (1S), a mismatch arises.
The details of relating intonation and other as-
pects of realization to context are still a research
topic. In this paper, we concentrate on one func-
tion of intonation, to realize information struc-
ture (IS). We consider IS as a level of meaning
that unifies a range of interacting contextually-
dependent aspects of utterance realization, en-
countered in various combinations within and
across languages. Determining the IS of system
utterances according to context, and producing
the corresponding realizations, are thus impor-
tant steps in generating natural system output.
Outline We show how we improve the spoken
output of an information-state based dialogue
system by controlling intonation using IS.
§2 summarizes related work on controlling in-
tonation in context. §3 gives background on IS,
1 We print words bearing a pitch accent in SMALL CAPI-
TALS and use the ToBI ("Tones, Breaks and Indices") nota-
tion for intonation, cf. http://www.ling.ohio-state.edurtobi/
227
§4 on the information-state approach to dialogue.
§5 presents rules for determining IS from the in-
formation state. §6 describes the generation of
spoken output with contextually varied intona-
tion in our system using two off-the-shelf speech
synthesis systems. §7 presents evaluation results.
We close with a summary and outlook in §8.
2 Related Work
Early work on controlling intonation of synthe-
sized speech in context concerned mainly ac-
centing open-class items on first mention, and
deaccenting previously mentioned or otherwise
"given" items (Hirschberg, 1993; Monaghan,
1994). But algorithms based on givennenss fail
to account for certain accentuation patterns, such
as marking explicit contrast among salient items.
Givenness alone also does not seem sufficient to
motivate accent type variation.
(Prevost, 1995) models contrastive accent pat-
terns and some accent type variation using Steed-
man's approach to IS in English (§3). In one ap-
plication he handles question-answer pairs where
the question intonation analysis in IS terms is
used to motivate the IS of the corresponding an-
swer, realized through intonation. Another appli-
cation concerns intonation in generation of short
descriptions of objects, where Theme/Rheme
partitioning is motivated on text progression
grounds, and Background/Focus partitioning dis-
tinguishes between alternatives in context.
Our approach to assigning IS is similar to Pre-
vost's in assigning IS according to the preceding
context, both in terms of what question is be-
ing answered and what alternatives are salient.
In our dialogue system, context is represented in
the information state, which evolves dynamically
as the dialogue progresses. In addition, we also
determine IS using domain knowledge.
3 Information Structure
Information structure (IS) is an inherent aspect
of meaning; it is important for establishing co-
herence and getting the intended message across.
IS partitioning refers to the organization speak-
ers impose on utterances to reflect the context
(what they believe is shared between them and
the hearer(s)) and the intended context change.
Despite conceptual similarities, various termi-
nologies exist to describe IS and its semantics
(Steedman and Kruijff-Korbayova, 2003).
We follow (Steedman, 2000), because of the
insights he incorporates and the degree of their
explicit formalization. In a number of respects
Steedman offers a synthesis of earlier propos-
als. His main point is to provide a compositional
analysis of English intonation in IS terms. Of
importance to our current enterprise are (i) the
discourse-semantic interpretation of IS and (ii)
the concrete correlations between IS and intona-
tion. Finally, Steedman's approach to IS in En-
glish has been used earlier to control the intona-
tion of synthesized speech in context (cf. §2).
3.1 IS Partitioning
Steedman recognizes two dimensions of IS: a
Theme/Rheme partitioning at the utterance-level,
and a further Background/Focus partitioning of
both Theme and Rheme. For example:
Theme Rheme
Theme/Rheme partitioning reflects an aboutness
relation: the Rheme is semantically predicated
over the Theme. In terms of a question test,
Theme corresponds to what the question sets up,
and Rheme is what answers it.
The Background/Focus partitioning reflects
contrast between alternatives, against which the
actual Theme and Rheme are cast.
3.2 IS Semantics
Elaborating on (Rooth, 1992; Biking, 1997),
(Steedman, 2000) defines this semantics for IS:
Rheme presupposes a Rheme-alternative set.
(p-AS). Rheme-Focus selects one element from
p-AS. Theme presupposes a Theme-alternative
set (0-AS). Without Focus in Theme, 0-AS is a
singleton set. Otherwise, 0-AS has more ele-
ments, and the Theme-Focus selects one of them.
The light in the	 KITCHEN	 is	 ON.
L+H" LH%
	
H*LL%
Backgr	 Focus	 Backgr Focus
228
AGENDA :	 STACK(ACTION)
PRIVATE PLAN :	 STACKSET(ACTION)
BEL :	 SET(PROPOSITION)
COM • SET(PROPOSITION)
QUD • STACK(QUESTION)
SHARED
:	 PARTICIPANT
LU •
[
SPEAKER
MOVES : ASSOCSET(MOvE,BOOL)
Figure 1: The Information State in GoDIS
3.3 IS and Intonation
IS can be realized by various means such as in-
tonation, word order, grammatical structure or
morphological marking. Here we concentrate on
IS realization by intonation. Steedman has ar-
gued extensively that in English IS is homomor-
phic to intonation structure. In a nutshell:
Theme/Rheme partitioning determines what
accents are used: L+H*, L*+H in Theme and H*,
L*, H*+L, H+L* in Rheme. Focus/Background
partitioning determines the placement of pitch
accents: they are assigned to words realizing the
Focus elements. Words realizing Background el-
ements do not carry an accent. A Rheme al-
ways contains a Focus, while Themes are marked
(with Focus) or unmarked (without Focus).
An L or H boundary marks the end of an in-
termediate phrase, and an L% or H% boundary
tone the end of an intonational phrase. Themes
or Rhemes can constitute intonational phrases.
Accents, appropriate boundaries and boundary
tones create tunes. Steedman argues that in En-
glish L+H*LH% is a marked-Theme tune, and
H*LLcY0 is one of the Rheme tunes in assertions.
(Uhmann, 1991) suggests similar default tunes
for German. We deviated from that by preserving
the basic tunes of the German speech synthesis
system we used, namely L+H*H-% for marked
Theme and H + L* LL`)/0 for Rheme.
4 Information State Based Approach
We implemented the generation of contextually
varied intonation in GoDIS, an experimental sys-
tem within the Information State framework,
built using TrindiKit2 . GoDIS handles informa-
tion exchange dialogue in travel agency and au-
2 http://www.ling.gu.se/projektfirindifirindikit/
toroute domains, and action-oriented dialogue at
the interface to a mobile phone, VCR and some
other home devices (Larsson, 2002).
The Information State approach to dialogue
modeling views dialogue as moves made by the
participants. Their content updates the informa-
tion state in various ways. The type of record
assumed for the GoDIS information state is a
version of the dialogue gameboard (Ginzburg,
1996) (Fig. 1). It is divided into a PRIVATE and
a SHARED part, the latter containing information
that the agent assumes to be shared by the par-
ticipants in the dialogue. Besides information
about the latest utterance (speaker and move(s)),
the SHARED part contains shared commitments
(a set of propositions) and QUD (a stack of ques-
tions under discussion). When a question is
asked, it is pushed onto the QUD, and is popped
off when it is answered. In the PRIVATE part, the
plan contains the system's long-term goals, while
the agenda contains more immediate actions.
A user utterance like "I'd like to go to London"
is recognized as a move giving a destination and
its content is represented in the shared commit-
ments as the proposition dest(london). The cor-
responding question, where does the user want to
go, is represented on the QUD as ?Ax.dest(x).
GoDIS also contains modules for input inter-
pretation, updating the information state, selec-
tion of next system move, and output genera-
tion, as well as resources such as lexicon and
domain knowledge. The domain knowledge in-
cludes, e.g., dialogue plans and semantic sorts.
5 Information Structure Determination
We present our approach to determining IS from
the information state here, and the corresponding
generation of varied intonation in §6.
229
5.1 IS Determination Rules
(Ginzburg, 1996) describes the felicity of an IS
partitioning as requiring that a certain question
is topmost on QUD. Based on that, we formu-
late the QUD-based Theme/Rheme determina-
tion (QudTR rule): If there is a question q top-
most on QUD, and an utterance u with content
c is to be uttered, where q is obtained by A-
abstracting over c, then that part of c which cor-
responds to q belongs to the Theme of u, and the
other part of c is the informative part which con-
stitutes the Rheme of u. For example, if the ques-
tion under discussion is ?AxAy.price(x, y), then
the propositional content price(200, euro) of an
answer can be partitioned as ( T Ax.price(x)
( R 200,Euro R ), where the Rheme corresponds
to the value of the price parameter.
The Focus/Background determination within
Theme and Rheme is done using (semantic) par-
allelism, which we define as follows (an informa-
tion unit is a basic term, a Theme or a Rheme, or
a proposition without Theme-Rheme partition-
ing): Two information units, a = al o a2 and
b = bl o b2 (0 means composition), are paral-
lel when al is parallel with bl and a2 is parallel
with b2. Two basic terms are parallel when they
are either identical or alternatives (belonging to
the same sort but non-identical). For example,
class(business) and class(economy) are par-
allel since the two instances of class are identi-
cal, and business and economy are alternative.
We now define two complementary rules for
determining Focus/Background based on paral-
lelism. The difference between them lies in what
the source of alternatives (and identicals) is. Fo-
cus is assigned to any element in an informativity
unit having an alternative:
(i) In the shared commitments (ComFB rule):
If price (1000, euro) is in the shared commit-
ments, and price(500, euro) is to be uttered, Fo-
cus will be assigned to 500, because that is what
distinguishes the price alternatives.
(ii) In the domain (DomFB rule): Given
business and economy are alternatives in the
domain, DomFB assigns Focus to economy in
class (economy).
5.2 Implementation
In our experimental implementation in GoDIS,
the selection algorithm evokes for each system
move the module for IS assignment. It takes as
input the propositional content of the move, and
returns it partitioned. IS assignment has several
phases (Fig. 2). First, the QudTR rule partitions
the semantic form into Theme and Rheme. Then,
the ComFB rule fires. If it fails to assign any
Focus, the DomFB rule fires.
The IS assigned to the content of a move is
encoded by the operators rh for Rheme, foc _rh
for Rheme-Focus and foc_th for Theme-Focus.
The IS-partitioned content is sent to the genera-
tion module, which produces a string of words
with an IS annotation using an internal set of
labels: <RH>, <F_RH> and <F_TH> respectively.
For instance, a fully partitioned proposition is
class(foc_th(business)), price(rh(foc _rh(1000))).
The generated utterance labeled with informa-
tion structure is: <F_TH> Business </F_TH> class
costs <RH> <F_RH> 1000 </F_RH> Euro</RH>.
The generation of the corresponding contexu-
ally varied spoken output in GoDIS is described
in §6. The sections below detail out how we get
the IS-partitioning of the propositions.
5.2.1 QudTR
The QudTR rule is implemented as four dis-
junctive selection rules which fire depending on
the semantics of the move to be generated and
the content of QUD. For example, the rule below
Figure 2: Information Structure Assignment
Coml, B
IS partitioned propositional content
230
is applied if there is a question topmost on QUD
which the proposition of the next move resolves. 3
RULE: qudTR
CLASS: selecur
fst(ScoNTENT_oF_NExT_movEs, answer(A))
PRE:	 fst(SQUD, ?A.B)
or fst($CONTENT_OF_NEXT_MOVES, inform(A))
$DOMAIN resolves(B, C)
EFF: rhemel(CONTENT_OF_NEXT_MOVES)
The assignment of Rheme, Rheme-Focus and
Theme-Focus is done by a number of operators.
For example, rhemel defined for an answer move
assigns Rheme to the argument of a proposition.
ope rat ion ( rheme 1 , °queue ( [Move 	 ) , [1,
°queue ( [Movel I
	 ) ) :—
Move = answer (A) ,
A =.. [Functor, Argument] ,
A2 =.. [Functor, rh (Argument) ,
Movel = answer (A2) .
Each information unit corresponding to a
Theme or a Rheme is further processed by the
rules assigning the Focus/Background partition-
ing using parallelism, which we turn to below.
5.2.2 ComFB
The ComFB rule currently applies to inform
or answer move. The in_set operator checks if
SHARED/COM contains a parallel proposition.
RULE: comFB
CLASS: select_fb
fst($coNTENT_oF_NExT_movEs,
inform(rh([ A _ ] ))) or
PRE:
	
fst($CONTENT_OF_NEXT_MOVES,
answer(A))
in_set(S/SHARED/COM, A)
EFF:
	 focus_arg(CONTENT_OF_NEXT_MOVES)
5.2.3 DomFB
The DomFB rule is implemented in three sep-
arate selection rules. The general case is covered
by the rule below that takes an answer or inform
move and tests for an alternative in the domain.
RULE: domFB
CLASS: select_fb
fst($coNTENT_oF_NExT_movEs, answer(A)) or
PRE:	 fst($CONTENT_OF_NEXT_MOVES, inform([A]))
$DOMAIN proposition(A)
EEE: { focus_arg(CONTENT_OF_NEXT_MOVES)
3 PRE and EFF abbreviate the precondition(s) and ef-
fect(s) of a rule, respectively.
Example To show the assignment of both
Theme-Focus and Rheme-Focus, consider (3):
(3) Si: Hello, how can I help you?
Ul: What is the price of a fight from Paris to
London on April fi fth?
S2: What class did you have in mind?
U2: I don't know.
S3: BUSINESS class costs ONE THOUSAND euro.
ECONOMY class costs FIVE HUNDRED euro.
The first utterance in (3S3) is an answer
move already partitioned into Theme/Rheme:
price(rh(1000)), class(business). This
Theme/Rheme partitioned move is the in-
put of the Focus/Background rules. In this case,
DomFB is applied since SHARED/COM con-
tains no proposition parallel to the proposition
in the answer class(business). The operator
f ocus _arg assigns Focus to the arguments
of the Rheme and the Theme. The resulting
partitioned propositions price(rh(foc_rh(1000)))
and class(foc_th(business)) serve as input to the
generation of the surface realization.
6 Producing Speech Output with
Intonation Variation
To produce contextualy varied spoken output in
GoDIS, we use the Mary and Festival text-to-
speech synthesis systems, and define mappings
from our internal IS annotation to intonation an-
notation used by these systems. We chose these
systems because they are both freely available,
and they both support not only the SABLE into-
nation annotation standard4 but also a more fine-
grained ToBI-based intonation annotation.
The integration of Festival and Mary into
GoDIS (Fig. 3) allows to experiment with: (i)
Mary for German using SABLE or GToBI in-
tonation annotation, (ii) Mary for English using
SABLE intonation annotation and (iii) Festival
for English using SABLE or the AMPL annota-
tion (Kruijff-Korbayova et al., 2003).
Here we concentrate on using Mary to gener-
ate German output, because that is the version
for which we already have evaluation results. An
evaluation of the English version is forthcoming
4 h ttp://www.bell-labs.com/project/tts/sable.html
231
Com: SABLE/Mary XM
MARY
Table 1: Experimental mapping of IS-partitioning to intonation annotation for German in Mary
IS-partitioning GToBI SABLE
Focus within Theme
Focus within Rheme
Unmarked-Theme boundary (before Rheme)
Marked-Theme boundary (before Rheme)
Rheme boundary (before Theme)
L+H*
H+L*
none
H-% (break ind. 3)
none
EMPH, 	 PITCH BASE="+15%"
EMPH, 	 PITCH BASE="+20%"
-
Figure 3: Integration of TTS systems in GoDIS.
Outprrtarodole
Text	 Festival	 MARY
interface	 interface	 interface
Mary is developed at DFKI and the Saarland
University. 5 It is designed to be highly mod-
ular, focusing on transparency and accessibility
of intermediate processing steps, which makes
it a suitable research tool. Mary currently han-
dles German and English. It supports SABLE
for both. For German Mary also suports the full
inventory of tones defined in the German ToBI
(Grice et al., to appear), and a set of break indices
that distinguish between a potential boundary lo-
cation (which might be "stepped up" and thus re-
alized by some phonological process later on), an
intermediate phrase break and sentence-final and
paragraph-final boundaries. To assign default ac-
cents, Mary treats clauses as intonation phrases,
and phrases as intermediate phrases. Each inter-
mediate phrase carries a pitch accent. The last
pitch accent in an intonation phrase is H+L*, all
others are L+H*. This default intonation struc-
ture corresponds roughly to an IS partitioning
with a marked Theme before Rheme (cf. §3.3).
The GoDIS—Mary interface overrides these
defaults. It converts the automatically assigned
5 http://mary.4fIci.de: (Schroder and Trouvain, 2001)
internal IS annotation tags into SABLE/GToBI
(cf. the tag mapping in Tab. 1), and stores the
result as SABLE- or Mary-XML, respectively.
7 Evaluation
To evaluate the impact of controlling intonation
through IS on the acceptability of system turns,
we conducted two experiments with the German
output of Mary. We tested whether there are dif-
ferences in acceptability between (i) default out-
put and (ii) the controlled intontation, in gen-
eral and for various IS patterns. First, we com-
pared contextual appropriateness of output pro-
duced with (i) the default intonation and con-
trolled intonation, using either (ii) GToBI or (iii)
SABLE intonation markup. Second, we carried
out a more detailed comparison of contextual ap-
propriateness for (i) the default intonation and
(ii) the controlled intonation using GToBI.
For each experiment, we prepared 3-5 turn di-
alogues from the travel agency and home-device
domains handled in GoDIS. 6 The last turn was
the evaluated system utterance. The turns were
constructed so that the context supported differ-
ent IS patterns in the target: Marked or unmarked
Theme before or after Rheme. Intonation anno-
tation was assigned as described in §5 and §6.
The dialogues were presented on a web page 7
with the targets highlighted in bold. The subjects
were asked to go through the dialogues one by
one, read a dialogue, listen to the target audio,
and judge the contextual appropriateness of its
intonation on a scale from 1 (worst) to 5 (best).
In the first experiment, 22 subjects judged 10 ut-
terances in different intonation versions, in the
6 We had to use constructed fragments, because we do
not have a corpus of GoDIS sessions.
7 http://www.coli. uni-sb.de/cl/projects/siridus/
232
second one it was 20 subjects and 16 utterances. 8
The default was generally judged worse than
SABLE output and that was judged worse than
GToBI output (Tab. 2, Ex.1). This was also the
case for utterances with unmarked Theme, irre-
spective of Theme-Rheme order (Tab. 3-4, Ex. 1).
For marked Theme, SABLE shows a slight im-
provement over the default (Tab. 5-6, Ex. 1).
However, this is due to slight differences in pro-
nunciation not due to the intonation annotation.
More detailed analysis revealed a few exceptions
when SABLE was judged better than GToBI. A
possible source is that SABLE annotated input
is additionally processed and possibly modified
by applying Mary defaults in ways we cannot
control. Thus, Mary may sometimes "improve"
the SABLE intonation specification (towards de-
fault). With GToBT we give specific annotations
that prevent the application of Mary defaults, but
may sometimes result in less smooth output.
In the second experiment we restricted the
comparison to the default and GToBI output, and
we varied the IS patterns systematically.
The second experiment confirms the ten-
dency that GToBI outputs get better acceptability
judgements than Mary defaults both overall (Tab.
2, Ex. 2) and per IS pattern (Tab. 3-6, Ex.2).
Comparing average absolute judgements can
be problematic, if the subjects place their judge-
ments differently on the scale. However, the
average differences between individual subjects'
judgements of the GToBI and default version of
each target were small and confirmed that GToBI
output is judged better than the default (Table 7).
After the first experiment, we also realized that
the setup we use cannot ensure the subjects actu-
ally take the context into account. We consid-
ered presenting the dialogues spoken (recorded
human-user turns and synthesized system turns),
but then the quality and intonation of turns other
than the target could influence the judgements.
Instead, we included evaluation of the targets
with default intonation in isolation before their
8 The subjects were mostly computational linguistics
students. Some had previous knowledge of phonetics or
experience with speech synthesis.
Table 2: Overal judgements
Exp.1 (10 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 3.35/3 3.23/3 3.62/4 3.19/3
stand.dev. 1.20 1.18 1.08 1.32
Exp.2 (16 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 3.59/4 3.47/4 3.71/4
stand.dev. 1.11 1.18 1.03
Table 3: Unmarked Theme, Theme before Rheme
Exp.1 (3 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 3.10/3 3.12/3 3.52/3 2.65/2
stand.dev. 1.32 1.42 1.09 1.36
Exp.2 (4 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 3.55/4 3.42/4 3.67/4
stand.dev. 1.11 1.13 1.08
Table 4: Unmarked Theme, Rheme before Theme
Exp.1 (2 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
meanmed. 3.67/4 3.68/4 3.70/4 3.60/3
stand.dev. 1.00 1.155 1.07 1.12
Exp.2 (4 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 3.63/4 3.56/4 3.70/4 -
stand.dev. 1.15 1.23 1.01
Table 5: Marked Theme, Theme before Rheme
Exp.1 (4 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 3.22/3 3.08/3 3.43/4 3.15/3
stand.dev. 1.16 1.11 1.20 1.23
Exp.2 (4 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 3.62/4 3.54/4 3.69/4
stand.dev. 1.05 1.05 1.06
Table 6: Marked Theme, Rheme before Theme
Exp.1 ( 1 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 4.13/4 3.25/3 4.50/4 4.55/5
stand.dev. 1.05 1.056 1.10 1.23
Exp.2 (4 sent.) All Default GToBI SABLE
mean/med. 3.47/4 3.3/4 3.63/4
stand.dev. 1.15 1.27 1.00
Table 7: Default vs. GToBI judgment differences
Exp.1 Th before Rh Rh before Th
+ Theme-Focus 0.44 1.53
- Theme-Focus 0.32 0.04
Exp.2 Th before Rh Rh before Th
+ Theme-Focus 0.29 0.28
- Theme-Focus 0.3 0.26
evaluation in context in the second experiment. 9
9 We did not include the non-default versions in the eval-
233
raises the issue of a suitable semantic represen-
tation. The semantics close to database contents
we use now obscures many aspects of meaning
important for more subtle dialoge modelling.
Acknowledgments This work has been sup-
ported by the EU project SIRIDUS (Specifica-
tion, Interaction and Reconfiguration in Dialogue
Understanding Systems, 1ST-1999-10516). We
thank Robin Cooper, Geert-Jan Kruijff, Staffan
Larsson and David Milward for discussions. We
are also grateful to the evaluation participants.
Since the default intonation corresponds to the
IS pattern with marked Theme before Rheme
(what may differ is the location of pitch accents),
we expected the judgements to remain about the
same when the context supports an IS partition-
ing which results in the same intonation as the
default. In other cases, we expected the judge-
ments for GToBI output to be better than those
for the default. These predictions were born out
by the differences between judgments of individ-
ual sentences with the respective IS patterns.
8 Conclusions
References
Our goal was to explore the use of the informa-
tion state to control the intonation of system out-
put. We concentrated on intonation as the real-
ization of IS. We defined a set of rules which de-
rive IS from the information state in GoDIS.
The information state, together with the do-
main knowledge, has proven to accommodate the
IS components and predications of (Steedman,
2000), which in turn is translatable into other ap-
proaches to IS. This in itself is a result and an
indication of the viability of our approach.
We developed an experimental implementa-
tion that uses speech synthesis systems support-
ing SABLE and ToBI-based intonation markup.
We presented the results of evaluating the imple-
mentation using Mary for generating contextu-
ally varied spoken output in German. The eval-
uation indicates that the contextual appropriate-
ness of system output improves when intonation
is assigned on the basis of IS.
A number of issues remain to be explored:
• Adjustments to the rules to properly cover
specific cases of dialogue moves
• Accounting for the interplay between infor-
mation in the information state and in the
domain knowledge
• Taking more dialogue history into account
• Making more subtle decisions about the re-
alization of information structure
The need for making more tine-grained se-
mantic choices such as the IS partitioning also
uation of targets in isolation, just to keep the down the num-
ber of judgements the subjects had to make.
Daniel Biking. 1997. The Meaning of Topic and Focus:
The 59th Street Bridge Accent. Routledge.
Jonathan Ginzburg. 1996. Interrogatives: Questions, facts
and dialogue. In The Handbook of Contemporary Se-
mantic Theory. Blackwell, Oxford.
Martine Grice, Stefan Baumann, and Ralf Benzmfiller. to
appear. German intonation in autosegmental-metrical
phonology. In Jun Sun-Ah, editor, Prosodic Typology.
Oxford University Press.
Julia Hirschberg. 1993. Pitch accent in context: Predict-
ing intonational prominence from text. Artificial Intelli-
gence, (63):305-340.
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayov 'a, Elena Karagjosova, Kepa Joseba
Rodr'iguez, and Stina Ericsson. 2003. A dialogue sys-
tem with contextually appropriate spoken output intona-
tion. In Proc. EACL'03. Budapest, Hungary.
Staffan Larsson. 2002. Issue-based Dialogue Manage-
ment. Ph.D. thesis, Goteborg University.
Alex Monaghan. 1994. Intonation accent placement in a
concept-to-dialogue system. In Proc. 2nd ESCA/IEEE
Wsh on Speech Synthesis, pp. 171-174. New Paltz, NY.
Scott Prevost. 1995. A Semantics of Contrast and Informa-
tion Structure for Specifying Intonation in Spoken Lan-
guage Generation. Ph.D. dissertation, IRCS TR 96-01,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Mats Rooth. 1992. A theory of focus interpretation. Natu-
ral Language Semantics, 1:75-116.
Marc SchrOder and Jurgen Trouvain. 2001. The German
text-to-speech synthesis system MARY. ln Proc. 4th
ISCA Wsh. on Speech Synthesis. Blair Atholl, UK.
Mark Steedman and Ivana Kruijff-Korbayov 'a. 2003 (to
appear). Two dimensions of information structure in
relation to discourse structure and discourse semantics.
Journal og Logic, Language and Information.
Mark Steedman. 2000. Information structure and the
syntax-phonology interface. Linguistic Inquiry,
31(4):649-689.
Susanne Uhmann. 1991. Fokusphonologie. Niemeyer.
234
