Ninth Conference 
of the 
European Chapter 
of the 
Association for 
Computational Linguistics 
8-12 June 1999 
University of Bergen 
Bergen, Norway 
Published by the Association for Computational Linguistics 
The conference was sponsored by 
LINGSOFT 
University of Bergen (Humanities Faculty) 
Bergen University Fund 
Norwegian Ministry of Education, Research and Church affairs 
Nordisk Spr~kteknologi AS(Nordic Language Technology) 
Ministry of Culture 
QCopyright 1999, Association for Computational Linguistics 
Order copies of this and other ACL publications from: 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers 
340 Pine Street, 6th floor 
San Francisco, CA 94104, USA 
+1 800 745 7323 
ii 
Preface 
This volume contains the papers prepared for the Ninth Conference of the European Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, held 8-12 June in Bergen, Norway. 
The conference programme f atures invited talks, tutorials, submitted papers in both main and student 
sessions and a poster and demo session. 
The main session Programme Committee received 99 abstracts from 20 countries around the world. Ev- 
ery paper was reviewed by at least hree reviewers via a web-based interface which preserved anonymity. 
The fairness of the process is we think demonstrated bythe broad spread of institutions and countries 
represented in the papers which were accepted and are printed here: 29 papers from 12 countries, with 
no country having more than 6 papers. The topics of the accepted papers cover a wide range of topics, 
and taken together we think they present an exciting and up-to-date sample of the best work in our 
field at the present time. 
Our Area Chairs worked extremely hard in recruiting the Programme Committee, allocating papers to 
reviewers and encouraging the completion of reviews on time, and then joined the Programme Chairs 
for an intensive all-day meeting in Edinburgh where the final decisions were made. We are extremely 
grateful to both the Area Chairs and the Programme Committee for their hard work. 
We used a new web-based approach to managing the paper submission and reviewing process this year, 
with authors registering an intention to submit electronically, and web-based reviewing processes, while 
at the same time retaining paper submission of the manuscripts hemselves. We've had a lot of positive 
feedback about the reviewing system from the Programme Committee. We hope the system worked for 
authors as well. 
Pulling together a meeting on this scale is a major effort, and thanks are due to many people for 
making it happen: Bruce Croft and Wolfgang Wahlster for the invited talks; Walter Daelemans for 
organising the tutorials and Robert Dale, Ronen Feldman, Adam Kilgarriff, Adwalt Ratnaparkhi, Ehud 
Reiter and Michael Rundell for preparing and delivering them; the EACL President (Donia Scott) and 
past President (John Nerbonne) for their helpful suggestions; Gertjan van Noord for organising the 
post-conference workshops and Jonas Kuhn and Avro Voutilainen for organising the student sessions. 
We are also very grateful to the Local Organisation Committee Chair, Koenraad e Smedt, for his 
patient cooperation with us over many issues, large and small, as well as his stirling efforts in making 
sure we would actually have a conference at which these papers could be presented. 
We also are indebted to Robert Inder made his web-based registration and reviewing system available 
to us, and Richard Tobin helped us adapt it to our needs. 
Local help in organising the Programme Committee meeting; with incoming and outgoing mail and 
with producing these Proceedings was provided by Janet Forbes and Margaret McMiltan, to whom 
many thanks. 
Henry S. Thompson, Alex Lascarides 
Programme Committee Chairs 
n l  
Programme Committee (Main Session) 
Programme Chair: Programme Co-Chair: 
Henry S. Thompson (University of Edinburgh) Alex Lascarides (University of Edinburgh) 
Area Chairs: 
John Carroll (University of Sussex) Rob Gaizauskas (Sheffield University) 
Jan Hajic (Charles University) Mats Rooth (University of Stuttgart) 
Paul Taylor (University of Edinburgh) Lyn Walker (AT&T Bell Labs) 
Programme Committee Members: 
Ann Abeille (University of Paris 7) 
Elisabeth Andre (DFKI, Saarbrucken) 
Doug Arnold (University of Essex) 
Ken Beesley (Xerox Research Centre Europe) 
Gosse Bouma (University of Groningen) 
Lynne CahiU (University of Sussex) 
Bob Carpenter (Lucent Technologies) 
Dick Crouch (University of Nottingham) 
Michael Collins (University of Pennsylvania) 
Morena Danieli (CSELT) 
Ted E. Dunning (Aptex) 
Michael Elhadad (Ben Gurion University) 
Roger Evans (University of Brighton) 
Dan Flickinger (Stanford University) 
Gregory Greffenstette (Xerox Research Centre Europe) 
Udo Hahn (University of Freiburgh) 
Djoerd Hiemstra (University of Twente) 
Barbora Hladka (Charles Univ., Prague) 
David Israel (SRI International) 
Arne Johnson (University of Linkoping) 
Douglas A. Jones (Dept. of Defense) 
Marcus Kracht (Free University of Berlin) 
Geert-Jan Kruijff (Charles University, Prague) 
Gina Levow (University of Maryland) 
Marc Light (MITRE Corporation) 
Inderjeet Mani (MITRE Corporation) 
Andrei Mikheev (Harlequin) 
Marc Moens (University of Edinburgh) 
Christine Nakatani (Lucent Technologies) 
Guenter Neumann (DFKI, Saarbruecken) 
Gertjan van Noord (University of Groningen) 
Karel Oliva (Univ. of Saarbruecken) 
Richard Power (University of Brighton) 
Steve Pulman (Cambridge University) 
Ehud Reiter (University of Aberdeen) 
Eileen Riloff (University of Utah) 
Bill Rounds (University of Michigan) 
Harold Somers (UMIST) 
Tomasz Strzalkowski (General Electric) 
John Tait (University of Sunderland) 
Marc Villain (MITRE Corporation) 
David Weir (University of Sussex) 
Dekai Wu (Hong Kong Univ. of Science and Tech.) 
Dan Zeman (Charles University, Prague) 
Ingrid Zukerman (Monash University) 
Steve Abney (AT&T Bell Labs) 
Susan Armstrong (ISSCO, Univ. of Geneva) 
Paolo Baggia (CSELT) 
Bill Black (UMIST) 
Eric Brill (CLSP Johns Hopkins Univ.) 
Nicoletta Calzolari (CNR, Pisa) 
Kenneth W. Church (AT&T Bell Labs) 
Fabio Ciravegna (IRST) 
Ann Copestake (Stanford University) 
Judy Delin (University of Stifling) 
Jan van Eijck (CWI) 
Tomaz Erjavec (Ljubljana Univ.) --- 
Frank van Eynde (Katholieke Universiteit Leuven) 
Claire Gardent (University of Saarbrucken) 
Ralph Grishman (New York University) 
Jiri Hana (Charles Univ., Prague) 
Julia Hirschberg (AT&T Bell Labs) 
Beryl Hoffman (Marymount University ) 
Karen Jensen (Microsoft) 
Mark Johnson (Brown University) 
Ewan Klein (University of Edinburgh) 
Hans-Ulrich Krieger (DFKI, Saarbruecken) 
Ivana Kruijff (Charles University, Prague) 
Hang Li (C&C Media Research Labs NEC Corp.) 
Suresh Manandhar (University of York) 
Mitch Marcus (Univ. of Pennsylvannia) 
David Milward (SRI Cambridge) 
Johanna Moore (University of Edinburgh) 
Mark-Jan Nederhof (DFKI, Saarbruecken) 
Anton Nijholt (University of Twente) 
Kemal Oflazer (New Mexico State University) 
Chris Paice (University of Lancaster) 
Victor Poznanski (Sharp Laboratories ofEurope) 
Owen Rambow (CogenTex Inc) 
Norbert Reithinger (DFKI, Saarbrucken) 
Craige Roberts (Ohio State University) 
Donia Scott (University of Brighton) 
Richard Sproat (AT&T Bell Labs) 
Marc Swerts (Institute for Perception Research) 
Louis des Tombe (Utrecht University) 
Juergen Wedekind (University of Stuttgart) 
Janyce Wiebe (New Mexico State University) 
Antonio Zampolli (CNR, Pisa) 
Michael Zock (LIMSI) 
. /  
iv 
Student Session 
Preface 
The student sessions have become an integral part of the EACL conferences. They provide an invaluable 
opportunity for young researchers to present heir work to the community and receive feedback for 
future activities. In this spirit, we kept the tradition of encouraging students to submit not only papers 
presenting completed work (like for the main sessions), but also reports on work in progress. 
We received 17 submissions from 8 countries, of which we accepted 8 papers for presentation a d two 
as reserve papers. Each submission was reviewed at least by two student reviewers and one faculty 
reviewer. 
We would like to thank the 31 reviewers for their fair assessment and their detailed comments, which 
we think were of great help for the student authors. Their names and affiliations are listed below. 
We want to thank the Student Sessions Co-chairs of this year's ACL conference Melanie Baljko (Toronto, 
Canada) and Anna Korhonen (Cambridge, UK), and the Student Session Chairs of previous ACL and 
COLING-ACL conferences, in particular Pamela W. Jordan (University of Pittsburgh, USA), Maria 
Milosavljevic (CSRIRO, Australia), and Dragomir R. Radev (Columbia University, USA), for providing 
supporting material and for their cooperation. Finally, we want to thank the organizers of the main 
conference, more specifically Koenraad e Smedt (Bergen, Norway), Alex Lascarides (Edinburgh, UK), 
Giorgio Satta (Padova, Italy), and Henry Thompson (Edinburgh, UK), and the members of the Euro- 
pean Chapter of ACL for their cooperation and help. 
Jonas Kuhn, Atro Voutilainen 
Programme Committee (Student Session) 
Programme Chair: Programme Co-Chair: 
Jonas Kuhn (Stuttgart, Germany) Atro Voutilainen (Helsinki, Finland) 
Programme Committee Members: 
Tilman Becket (Saarbriicken, Germany) 
Stefanie Dipper (Stuttgart, Germany) 
Phil Harrison (London, UK) 
Timo J~rvinen (Helsinki, Finland) 
Alexandra Kinyon (Paris, France/Pennsylvania, USA) 
Peter Kranse (Stuttgart, Germany) 
Kordula de Kuthy (Saarbriicken, Germany) 
Scott McDonald (Edinburgh, UK) 
Bernd Mhbius (Stuttgart, Germany) 
Mark-Jan Nederhof (Saarbrficken, Germany) 
Llu~s Padr5 (Barcelona, Spain) 
Peter Poller (Saarbrficken, Germany) 
Stefan Riezler (Stuttgart, Germany) 
Henk Schotel (Maastricht, Netherlands) 
G6khan Tfir (SRI, Menlo Park, CA, USA) 
Anssi Yli-Jyr~i (Helsinki, Finland) 
Gosse Bouma (Groningen, Netherlands) 
Bjhrn Gamb~ck (SICS, Sweden) 
Joris Hulstijn (Utrecht, Netherlands) 
Frank Keller (Edinburgh, UK) 
Jacques Koreman (Sa2xbrficken, Germany) 
Jan van Kuppevelt (Stuttgart, Germany) 
Maria Lapata (Edinburgh, UK) 
Guido Minnen (Sussex, UK) 
Christof Monz (Amsterdam, Netherlands) 
Nicolas Nicolov (Sussex, UK) 
Jussi Piitulainen (Helsinki, Finland) 
Detlef Prescher (Stuttgart, Germany) 
Antje Roi3deutscher (Stuttgart, Germany) 
Mariet Theune (Eindhoven, Netherlands) 
Jennifer Venditti (AT&T Bell Labs, USA) 
Programme Committee (Poster Session) 
Programme Chair :  
Giorgio Satta (University of Padua) 
Programme Committee Members: 
Breck Baldwin (University of Pennsylvania) 
Mari Broman Olsen (University of Maryland) 
Marie-Helene Candito (Universite Paris 7) 
Luca Dini (CELI, SNS, Italy) 
Jason Eisner (University of Pennsylvania) 
Mark Hepple (University of Sheffield) 
Carolyn Penstein Ros@ 
Emanuele Pianta (IRST, Italy) 
Norbert Reithinger (DFKI, Saarbr/icken) 
Pasi Tapanainen (University of Helsinki) 
Tilman Becker (DFKI, Saarbriicken) 
Federica Busa (Brandeis University) 
Thierry Declerck (DFKI, Saarbriicken) 
Christy Doran (University of Brighton) 
Karin Harbusch (University of Koblenz) 
Elena Not (IRST, Italy\]) 
Fabio Pianesi (IRST, Italy) 
Owen Rambow (CogenTex Inc.) 
Srinivas Bangalore (AT&T Bell Labs) 
Jakub Zavrel (Tilberg University) 
vi 
Table of Contents 
Andrei  Mikheev, Marc Moens and Claire Grover 1 
Named Entity Recognition without Gazetteers 
Richard Power 9 
Generating Referring Expressions with a Unification Grammar 
Didier Bourigault  and Christ ian Jacquemin 15 
Term Extraction and Term Clustering: An Integrated Platform for Computer-Aided Terminology 
Ian M. O'Neill and Michael F. McTear 23 
An Object-Oriented Approach to the Design of Dialogue Management Functionality 
Maria Lapata, Scott McDonald and Frank Keller 30 
Determinants of Adjective-Noun Plausibility 
Mir iam Eckert and Michael Strube 37 
Resolving Discourse Deictic Anaphora in Dialogues 
Suzanne Stevenson and Paola Merlo 45 
Automatic Verb Classification Using Distributions of Grammatical Features 
Pierre Boullier 53 
Chinese Numbers, MIX, Scrambling, and Range Concatenation Grammars 
Glyn Morri l l  61 
Geometry of Lexico-Syntactic Interaction 
Franz Josef Och 71 
An Efficient Method for Determining Bilingual Word Classes 
Inderjeet Mani,  Therese Firmin, David House~ Gary Klein 
Beth Sundheim and Lynette  Hirschman 77 
The TIPSTER SUMMA C Text Summarization Evaluation 
T im Fernando 86 
Ambiguous Propositions Typed 
Rila Mandala~ Takenobu Tokunaga nd Hozumi Tanaka 94 
Complementing WordNet with Roget's and Corpus-based Thesauri for Information Retrieval 
Fabio Ciravegna nd Alberto Lavelli 102 
Full Text Parsing using Cascades of Rules: An Information Extraction Perspective 
Simone Teufel, Jean Car letta and Marc Moens 110 
An Annotation Scheme for Discourse-level Argumentation i Research Articles 
Thorsten Brants 118 
Cascaded Markov Models 
Dale Gerdemann and Gert jan van Noord 126 
Transducers from Rewrite Rules with Backreferences 
Giorgos S. Orphanos and Dimitris N. Christodoulakis 134 
POS Disambiguation and Unknown Word Guessing with Decision Trees 
vii 
Maria Wolters and Mathias Kirsten 142 
Exploring the Use of Linguistic Features in Domain and Genre Classification 
Miguel A. Alonso~ David Cabrero~ Eric de la Clergerie and Manuel Vilares 150 
Tabular Algorithms for TAG Parsing 
Efstathios Stamatatos~ Nikos Fakotakis and George Kokkinakis 158 
Automatic Authorship Attribution 
Guido Minnen 165 
Selective Magic I-IPSG Parsing 
Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Jorn Veenstra 173 
Representing Text Chunks 
ttiroyuki Shinnou 180 
Detection of Japanese Homophone Errors by a Decision List 
Including a Written Word as a Default Evidence 
John Chen~ Srinivas Bangalore and K. Vijay-Shanker 188 
New Models for Improving Supertag Disambiguation 
Kiyotaka Uchimoto~ Satoshi Sekine and Hitoshi Isahara 196 
Japanese Dependency Structure Analysis based on Maximum Entropy Models 
Atro Voutilainen 204 
An Experiment on the Upper Bound of Interjudge Agreement: The Case of Tagging 
Fumiyo Fukumoto and Yoshimi Suzuki 209 
Word Sense Disambiguation i Untagged Text Based on Terra Weight Learning 
John CarroU, Nicolas Nicolov~ Olga Shaumyan~ Martine Smets and David Weir 217 
Parsing with an Extended Domain of Locality 
viii 
Student Session 
Gabriela Cavaglih 
The Development ofLexical Resources for Information Extraction 
from Text Combining WordNet and Dewey Decimal Classification 
Donna K. Byron  and Joe l  R. Tetreault  
A Flexible Architecture for Reference Resolution 
Patr ick Caudal  
Result States and the Lexicon: The Proper Treatment of Event Structure 
Daniel S. Paiva 
Investigating NLG Architectures: Taking Style into Consideration 
Just in  P icard  
Finding Content-bearing Terms Using Term Similarities 
Dimitr ios Kokkinakis and Sofie Johansson Kokkinakis 
A Cascaded Finite-State Parser for Syntactic Analysis of Swedish 
Patr ice Lopez 
Repair Strategies for Lexicalized Tree Grammars 
Veit Reuer  
Dialogue Processing in a CALL-System 
Yah Zuo 
Focusing on Focus: A Formalization 
Aline Vil lavicencio 
Representing a System of Lexical Types Using Default Unification 
225 • 
229 
233 
237 
241 
245 
249 
253 
257 
261 
ix 
Poster Session 
Izaskun Aldezabal, Inaki Alegria, 01atz Ansa, Jose Mari Arriola, 
Nerea Ezeiza, Itziar Aduriz and Alexander Da Costa 265 
Designing Spelling Correctors for Inflected Languages Using Lexical Transducers 
Hans Argenton and Anke Feldhaus 267 
The Treegram Index--An Efficient Technique for Retrieval inLinguistic Treebanks 
John Carroll, Guido Minnen, Darren Pearce, Yvonne Canning, Siobhan Devlin and 269 
John Tait 
Simplifying Text for Language-Impaired Readers 
Nigel Collier, Hyun Seok Park, Norihiro Ogata, Yuka Tateishi, Chikashi Nobata, 
Tomoko Ohta, Tateshi Sekimizu, Hisao Imai, Katsutoshi Ibushi and Jun-ichi Tsuijii 271 
The GENIA Project: Corpus-based Knowledge Acquisition and Information Extraction 
from Genome Research Papers 
Crit Cremers 273 
A Note on Categorial Grammar, Disharmony and Permutation 
Johann Gamper 275 
Encoding a Parallel Corpus for Automatic Terminology Extraction 
Adam Kilgarriff 277 
95~o Replicability for Manual Word Sense Tagging 
TorbjSrn Lager 279 
#-TBL Lite: A Small, Extendible Transformation-Based L arner 
John Nerbonne, Wilbert Heeringa nd Peter Kleiweg 281 
Comparison and Classification of Dialects 
Frank Schilder 283 
Pointing to Events 
Mark Stevenson 285 
A Corpus-Base Approach to Deriving Lexical Mappings 
Jos~ Relafio Gil, Daniel Tapias, Maria C. Gancedo, Marcela Charfuelan and 287 
Luis A. Herngmdez 
Robust and Flexible Mixed-Initiative Dialogue for Telephone Services 
KaiU Miifirisep 291 
Determination of Syntactic Functions in Estonian Constraint Grammar 
X 
Author Index 
Miguel A. Alonso 150 
Srinivas Bangalore 188 
Pierre Boullier 53 
Didier Bourigault 15 
Thorsten Brants 118 
David Cabrero 150 
Jean Carletta 110 
John Carroll 217 
John Chen 188 
Dimitris N. Christodoulakis 134 
Fabio Ciravegna 102 
Eric de la Clergerie 150 
Myriam Eckert 37 
Nikos Fakotakis 158 
Tim Fernando 86 
Therese Firmin 77 
Fumiyo Fukumoto 209 
Dale Gerdemann 126 
Claire Grover 1 
Lynette Hirschman 77 
David House 77 
Hitoshi Isahara 196 
Christian Jacquemin 15 
Frank Keller 30 
Mathias Kirsten 142 
Gary Klein 77 
George Kokkinakis 158 
Maria Lapata 30 
Alberto Lavelli 102 
Rila Mandala 94 
Inderjeet Mani 77 
Scott McDonald 30 
Michael F. McTear 23 
Paola Merlo 45 
Andrei Mikheev 1 
Guido Minnen 165 
Marc Moens 1, 110 
Glyn Morrill 61 
Nicolas Nicolov 217 
Gertjan van Noord 126 
Franz Josef Och 71 
Ian M. O'Neill 23 
Giorgos S. Orphanos 134 
Richard Power 9 
Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang 173 
Satoshi Sekine 196 
Olga Shaumyan 217 
Hiroyuki Shinnou 180 
Martine Smets 217 
Efstathios Stamatatos 158 
Suzanne Stevenson 45 
Michael Strube 37 
Beth Sundheim 77 
Yoshimi Suzuki 209 
Hozumi Tanaka 94 
Simone Teufel 110 
Takenobu Tokunaga 94 
Kiyotaka Uchimoto 196 
Jorn Veenstra 173 
K. Vijay-Shanker 188 
Manuel Vilares 150 
Atro Voutilainen 204 
David Weir 217 
Maria Wolters 142 
Student Author Index 
Donna K. Byron 229 
Patrick Caudal 233 
Gabriela Cavagli~ 225 
Sophie Johansson Kokkinakis 245 
Dimitrios Kokkinakis 245 
Patrice Lopez 249 
Daniel S. Paiva 237 
Justin Picard 241 
Veit Reuer 253 
Joel R. Tetreault 229 
Aline Villavicencio 261 
Yan Zuo 257 
xi 
Poster Author Index 
Itziar Aduriz 265 
Izaskun Aldezabal 265 
Inaki Alegria 265 
Olatz Ansa 265 
Hans Aregenton 267 
Jose Mari Arriola 265 
Yvonne Canning 269 
John Carroll 269 
Marcela Charfuelan 287 
Nigel Collier 271 
Alexander Da Costa 265 
Crit Cremers 273 
Siobhan Devlin 269 
Nerea Ezeiza 265 
Anke Feldhaus 267 
Johann Gamper 275 
Maria G. Gancedo 287 
Jos~ Relafio Gil 287 
Wilbert Heeringa 281 
Luis A. Hern~ndez 287 
Katsutoshi Ibushi 271 
Hisao Imai 271 
Adam Kilgarriff 277 
Peter Kleiweg 281 
TorbjSrn Lager 279 
Guido Minnen 269 
Kaili Mfifirisep 291 
John Nerbonne 281 
Chikashi Nobata 271 
Norihiro Ogata 271 
Tomoko Ohta 271 
Hyun Seok Park 271 
Darren Pearce 269 
Frank Schilder 283 
Tateshi Sekimizu 271 
Mark Stevenson 285 
John Tait 269 
Daniel Tapias 287 
Yuka Tateishi 271 
Jun-ichi Tsuijii 271 
xii 
June 9, 1999 
0830- 0930 
0930- 0940 
0940- 1020 
1020- 1100 
ii00- 1130 
1130- 1230 
1230- 1400 
1400- 1430 
1430- 1510 
1510- 1550 
1550- 1620 
1620- 1700 
EACL '99 Programme 
Registration 
Welcome 
Main session 1 
Auditorium 2
Andrei Mikheev, Marc Moens and Claire Grover: Named Entity Recognition without 
Gazetteers 
Auditorium 3
Richard Power: Generating Referring Expressions with a Unification Grammar 
Main session 2 
Auditorium 2
Didier Bourigault and Christian Jacquemin: Term Extraction and Term Clustering: An 
Integrated Platform for Computer-Aided Terminology 
Auditorium 3
Ian M. O'Neill and Michael McTear: An Object-Oriented Approach to the Design of Dia- 
logue Management Functionality 
Break 
Invited talk 
Auditorium 2
Bruce Croft: Language Models for Information Retrieval 
Lunch 
Student session 1 
Auditorium 2
Gabriela Cavaglik: The Development of Lexical Resources for Information Extraction from 
Text Combining WordNet and Dewey Decimal Classification 
Auditorium 3
Donna K. Byron and Joel R. Tetreault: A Flexible Architecture for Reference Resolution 
Main session 3 
Auditorium 2
Maria Lapata, Scott McDonald and Frank Keller: Determinants of Adjective-Noun Plausi- 
bility 
Auditorium 3
Miriam Eckert and Michael Strube: Resolving Discourse Deictic Anaphora in Dialogues 
Break 
Student session 2 
Auditorium 2
Patrick Caudal: Result States and the Lexicon: the Proper Treatment of Event Structure 
Auditorium 3
Daniel S. Paiva: Investigating NLG Architectures: Taking Style into Consideration 
Main session 4 
Auditorium 2
Susanne Stevenson and Paola Merlo: Automatic Verb Classification Using Distributions of 
Grammatical Features 
Auditorium 3
Pierre Boullier: Chinese Numbers, MIX, Scrambling and Range Concatentation Grammars 
xiii 
June 10t 1999 
0900 - 0940 Main session 1 
Auditorium 2
Glyn Morrill: Geometry of Lexico-Syntactic Interaction 
Auditorium 3
Franz Josef Och: An Efficient Method for Determining Bilingual Word Classes 
0940 - 1020 Main session 2 
Auditorium 2
Inderjeet Mani, Therese Firmin, David House, Gary Klein, Beth Sundheim, 
Hirschman: The TIPSTER SUMMAC Text Summarization Evaluation 
Auditorium 3
Tim Fernando: Ambiguous Propositions Typed 
Lynette 
1020- 1050 Break 
1050- 1150 
1150- 1230 
Invited talk 
Auditorium 2
Wolfgang Wahlster: Deep Processing of Shallow Structures: The Robust Integration of 
Speech, Language and Translation Technology for Intelligent Interface Agents 
Main session 3 
Auditorium 2
Rila Mandala, Takenobu Tokunaga and Hozumi Tanaka: Complementing WordNet with 
Roget's and Corpus-based Thesauri for Information Retrieval 
Auditorium 3
Fabio Ciravegna nd Alberto Lavelli: Full Text Parsing Using Cascades of Rules: An Infor- 
mation Extraction Perspective 
1230- 1400 Lunch 
1400- 1430 
1430 - 1510 
Student session 1 
Auditorium 2
Justin Picard: Finding Content-bearing Terms using Term Similarities 
Auditorium 3
Dimitrios Kokkinakis and Sophie Johansson Kokkinakis: A Cascaded Finite-State Parser 
for Syntactic Analysis of Swedish 
Main session 4 
Auditorium 2
Simone Teufel, Jean Carletta and Marc Moens: An Annotation Scheme for Discourse Level 
Argumentation i Research Articles 
Auditorium 3
Thorsten Brants: Cascaded Markov Models 
1510- 1550 Break 
1550- 1620 
1620- 1700 
Student session 2 
Auditorium 2
Patrice Lopez: Repair Strategies for Lexicalized Tree Grammars 
Auditorium 3
Veit Reuer: Dialogue Processing in a CALL-System 
Main session 5 
Auditorium 2
Dale Gerdemann and Gertjan van Noord: Transducers from Rewrite Rules with Backrefer- 
ences 
Auditorium 3
Giorgos Orphanos and Dimoitris Christodoulakis: POS Disambiguation and Unknown Word 
Guessing with Decision Trees 
xiv 
June  11~ 1999 
0900- 0940 
0940- 1020 
Main session 1 
Auditorium 2
Maria Wolters and Mathias Kirsten: Exploring the Use of Linguistic Features in Domain 
and Genre Classification 
Auditorium 3 
Miguel Alonso, David Cabrero, Eric de la Clergerie and Manuel Vilares: Tabular Algorithms 
for TAG Parsing 
Main session 2 
Auditorium 2
Efstathios Stamatatos, Nikos Fakotakis and George Kokkinakis: Automatic Authorship 
Attribution 
Auditorium 3
Guido Minnen: Selective Magic HPSG Parsing 
1020- 1050 Break 
1050- 1150 
1150- 1230 
Poster and Demo session 
Main session 3 
Auditorium 2
Erik Tjong Kim Sang and Jorn Veenstra: Representing Text Chunks 
Auditorium 3
Hiroyuki Shinnou: Detection of Japanese Homophone Errors by a Decision List Including a 
Written Word as a Default Evidence 
1230- 1400 Lunch 
1400- 1440 
1440-1520 
Main session 4 
Auditorium 2
John Chen, Srinivas Bangalore and K. Vijay-Shanker: New Models for Improving Supertag 
Disambiguation 
Auditorium 3
Kiyotaka Uchimoto, Satoshi Sekine and Hitoshi Isahara: Japanese Dependency Structure 
Analysis based on Maximum Entropy Models 
Main session 5 
Auditorium 2
Atro Voutilainen: An Experiment on the Upper Bound of Interjudge Agreement: The Case 
of Tagging 
Auditorium 3 
Fumiyo Fukumoto and Yoshimi Suzuki: Word Sense Disambiguation i Untagged Text 
Based on Term Weight Learning 
1520- 1535 Break 
1535 - 1615 Business meeting (incl. TEI) 
Auditorium 2
XV 
Posters 
Izaskun Aldezabal, Inaki Alegria, Olatz Ansa, Jose Mari Arriola, Nerea Ezeiza, Itziar Aduriz and 
Alexander Da Costa: Designing Spelling Correctors for Inflected Languages Using Lexical Transducers 
Hans Argenton and Anke Feldhaus: The Treegram Index--An Efficient Technique for Retrieval in 
Linguistic Treebanks 
John Carroll, Guido Minnen, Darren Pearce, Yvonne Canning, Siobhan Devlin and John Tait: Simpli- 
fyng Text for Language-Impaired Readers 
Nigel Collier, Hyun Seok Park, Norihiro Ogata, Yuka Tateishi, Chikashi Nobata, Tomoko Ohta, Tateshi 
Sekimizu, Hisao Imai, Katsutoshi Ibushi, Jun-ichi Tsuijii: The GENIA Project: Corpus-Based Knowl- 
edge Acquisition and Information Extraction from Genome Research Papers 
Crit Cremers: A Note on Categorial Grammar, Disharmony and Permutation 
Johann Gamper: Encoding a Parallel Corpus for Automatic Terminology Extraction 
Jos6 Relafio Gil, Daniel Tapias, Maria C. Gancedo, Marcela Charfuelan and Luis A. Hern~ndez: Robust 
and Flexible Mixed-Initiative Dialogue for Telephone Services 
Adam Kilgariff: 95% Replicability for Manual Word Sense Tagging 
TorbjSrn Lager: #-TBL: A Small, Extendible Transformation-Based L arner 
Kaili Mfiiirisep: Determination f Syntactic Functions in Estonian Constraint Grammar 
John Nerbonne, Wilbert Heeringa nd Peter Kieiweg: Comparison and Classification of Dialects 
Frank Schilder: Pointing to Events 
Mark Stevenson: A Corpus-Based Method for Deriving Lexical Mappings 
xvi 
Tutorials 
The tutorials take place on June 8th, 1999. 
Practical Text Mining 0930-1300 
Lecturer: Ronen Feldman (Bar-Ilan University) 
The information age has made it easy to store large amounts of data. The proliferation of documents 
available on the Web, on corporate intranets, on news wires, and elsewhere is overwhelming. However, 
while the amount of data available to us is constantly increasing, our ability to absorb and process this 
information remains constant. Search engines only exacerbate he problem by making more and more 
documents available in a matter of a few key strokes. Text Mining is a new and exciting research area that 
tries to solve the information overload problem by using techniques from data mining, machine learning, 
NLP, IR and knowledge management. Text Mining involves the preprocessing of document collections 
(text categorization, term extraction), the storage of the intermediate r presentations, the techniques to 
analyze these intermediate r presentations (distribution analysis, clustering, trend analysis, association 
rules etc) and visualization of the results. In this tutorial we will present he general theory of Text 
Mining and will demonstrate s veral systems that use these principles to enable interactive xploration 
of large textual collections. We will present a general architecture for text mining and will outline the 
algorithms and data structures behind the systems. Special emphasis will be given to efficient algorithms 
for very large document collections, tools for visualizing such document collections, the use of intelligent 
agents to perform text mining on the internet, and the use information extraction to better capture the 
major themes of the documents. The Tutorial will cover the state of the art in this rapidly growing area 
of research. Several real world applications of text mining will be presented. 
Natural Language Learning with the Maximum Entropy Framework 1400-1730 
Lecturer: Adwait Ratnaparkhi  (IBM TJ Watson Research Center) 
"Corpus-based" approaches to natural language processing (NLP), also known as "statistical" or "ma- 
chine learning" approaches, have become popular in recent years due to the availability of large, anno- 
tated corpora. This tutorial will discuss how to implement a corpus-based NLP tool with the maximum 
entropy framework. We will first describe the maximum entropy framework, and then discuss its appli- 
cation to several problems, including sentence boundary detection, part-of-speech tagging, prepositional 
phrase attachment, parsing, and text categorization. Our experience has shown that this framework 
yields consistently high accuracies, requires relatively "knowledge-poor" informants, and is highly re- 
usable across tasks. A general outline of the tutorial: 
1. What is the maximum entropy framework ? 
2. Using it for integrating diverse sources of evidence: 
• Sentence Boundary Detection 
• Part of Speech tagging 
• Parsing 
3. Using it with and without annotated data: 
• Prepositional Phrase Attachment 
4. Comparing its performance with other learning techniques: 
• Text Categorization 
• Incremental vs. Frequency-based f ature selection 
• Decision Trees (C5.0) 
5. Summary: Advantages and Disadvantages of the framework 
xvii 
Building Natural Language Generation Systems 0930-1300 
Lecturers: Rober t  Dale (MRI, Macquarie University), Ehud Rei ter  (University of Aberdeen) 
Natural anguage generation (NLG) systems produce understandable texts in English and other human 
languages from some underlying non-linguistic representation f information. NLG systems combine 
knowledge about language and the application domain to automatically produce documents, reports, 
explanations, help messages, and other kinds of texts. 
In this tutorial we describe NLG from an applied system-building perspective;: that is, we will explain 
how NLG systems are built. Our presentation will be based on a popular architectural model which 
encompasses the three stages of text planning, microplanning, and realisation. We will also give examples 
of current NLG applications; discuss when NLG technology is and is not appropriate; and explore how 
NLG can be integrated into multimedia, hypertext, and speech systems. 
This tutorial should be useful for managers, implementors, and researchers. For managers, it will provide 
a broad overview of the field and what is possible today; for implementors, it will provide a realistic 
assessment of available techniques; and for researchers, it will highlight he issues that are important in 
current applied NLG projects. 
Lexicography for Computationalists 1400-1730 
Lecturers: Adam Kilgarriff  (University of Brighton), Michael Rundel l  
NLP makes extensive use of dictionaries, but frequently proceeds in ignorance of lexicography. Even on 
computational lexicography projects, workers rarely have a background in lexicography. If workers in 
NLP were better informed about how dictionaries were produced, the purposes they were designed to 
serve, and what distinguished good dictionaries from bad ones, they would be better placed to choose 
a dictionary and to exploit the information it contained. 
The tutorial will describe the goals and practices of corpus-based dictionary-making. Participants will 
gain an appreciation of the kinds of judgements that lexicographers need to make every day and the 
criteria they use. The tutorial will include practical exercises. 
We shall also discuss models for lexicography/NLP collaboration, including SENSEVAL, the recent 
evaluation exercise for word sense disambiguation programs. 
xviii 
