In Proceedings of the 9th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL (EACL'99), Bergen, Norway
Simplifying Text for Language-Impaired Readers
John Carroll
Guido Minnen
Darren Pearce
Cognitive and Computing Sciences
University of Sussex
Brighton BN1 9QH, UK
fjohnca,guidomi,darrenpg@cogs.susx.ac.uk
Yvonne Canning
Siobhan Devlin
John Tait
Computing and Information Systems
University of Sunderland
Sunderland SR6 0DD, UK
rstname.lastname@sunderland.ac.uk
1 Introduction
Automatic text simplication for language-
impaired readers is a relatively unexplored area
in natural language processing. We describe a
generic system for text simplication (currently
at the prototype stage) incorporating a range of
state-of-the-art language processing tools. We are
applying the system to help people with apha-
sia (various language impairments, typically oc-
curring as a result of a stroke or head injury) to
understand English newspaper articles
1
.
Aphasic people may encounter many problems
when reading. It has been demonstrated (Devlin,
1999) that these problems can be of a lexical na-
ture since less frequent words are often not readily
available, and also of a syntactic nature in that
particular constructions may pose serious dicul-
ties for understanding. In addition to these gen-
eral aspects of text, there are also problems spe-
cic to newspaper text; for example, the often very
compact summary-like rst paragraph in an arti-
cle; long sentences; the use of noun compounds
and long sequences of adjectives; and frequent use
of the passive. Although there is wide variation
in the language problems associated with aphasia,
depending on such factors as locus of brain injury,
aphasia type, and pre-aphasic literacy level, many
aphasic people would benet from a system of the
sort we describe.
We outline below the processing strategy of the
system and the user-centered evaluation we intend
to carry out. We envisage that the results of this
project will be of use not only to aphasic individ-
uals, but also to other groups such as non-native
speakers whose comprehension of written English
text is restricted by limited foreign language skills.
1
This work is being carried out on the project
`PSET: Practical Simplication of English Text'
funded by the UK EPSRC (refs GR/L53175
and GR/L53175). The rst author is sup-
ported by an EPSRC Advanced Fellowship.
Further information about PSET is available at
<http://osiris.sunderland.ac.uk/~pset/welcome.html>.
2 The System
We download the original newspaper articles auto-
matically from the WWW
2
, and apply a number
of processing stages sequentially.
Lexical Tagger The tagger (Elworthy, 1994)
assigns and ranks part-of-speech (PoS) tags for
each word in a sentence using a rst-order HMM.
The tagger includes an unknown word guesser
with an accuracy of around 85%, and a large disk-
resident lexicon specialised to newspaper text.
Morphological Analyser The morphological
analyser (an enhanced version of the GATE
project lemmatiser (Cunningham et al., 1996)) is
based on nite state techniques, and performs an
accurate and ecient inectional analysis of the
words in a text given the PoS assignment made
by the tagger.
Parser The parser uses a robust feature-based
unication grammar of PoS and punctuation
tags (Briscoe and Carroll, 1995), coupled with
probabilistic LR disambiguation (Carroll and
Briscoe, 1996), assigning the most plausible `shal-
low' phrase structure analysis to the PoS network
(lattice) returned by the tagger. Coverage of a
substantial corpus of general text is around 80%.
We will improve coverage by utilising recent gram-
mar learning techniques (Osborne, Submitted) to
dynamically improve coverage in a principled and
tractable manner.
Anaphor Resolver The anaphor resolution
component (the only stage not as yet implemented
in any form) will be based on CogNIAC (Baldwin,
1997), but rewritten to take advantage of the pre-
ceding processing.
Syntactic Simplier Aphasic people may have
problems with syntactic constructions that de-
viate from canonical subject-verb-object order.
2
We are using a local newspaper in the north-east
of England, The Sunderland Echo, that is also pub-
lished online.
Thus, passive sentences such as The scheme was
singled out by a recent Government report are
found dicult
3
, despite the presence of the syn-
tactic cues was, -ed and by. We therefore replace
passive constructions with corresponding active
forms. We are currently integrating further rules
to split conjoined sentences and extract embedded
clauses. Syntactic simplication operates itera-
tively until a conguration is reached that cannot
be simplied. This approach is broadly similar to
that proposed by (Chandrasekar et al., 1996).
One of the many challenges in syntactic simpli-
cation is the observed eect of the total length of a
text being increased when longer sentences are re-
placed by multiple shorter ones. Also, the removal
of cohesive devices such as conjunctions may re-
sult in anaphora crossing sentence boundaries. To
maintain text coherence and cohesion (Grodzin-
sky et al., 1993) an anaphor is replaced by its ref-
erent if the containing sentence is split.
Lexical Simplier The lexical simplier
(based on (Devlin, 1999; Devlin and Tait, 1998))
replaces content words with simpler synonyms.
It rst retrieves a set of synonyms for each word
from WordNet (Miller et al., 1993), then, accord-
ing to the user's desired level of simplication, the
original word plus a percentage of the synonym
list are looked up in the Oxford Psycholinguistic
Database (Quinlan, 1992) for the corresponding
Kucera-Francis frequencies. The word with the
highest frequency is selected.
Morphological Generator Simplication
works on the inectionally analysed text, so
the last stage is morphological generation. The
generator is simply an inverted version of the
morphological analyser described above. The
inversion is performed automatically (Minnen and
Carroll, Submitted), so any improvements made
to the analyser are reected in the generator at
no extra cost. Finally, inter-word spelling changes
(e.g. a apple ! an apple), auxiliary reduction,
etc. are performed.
3 Evaluation
We will perform an experimental evaluation of the
system with the help of aphasic participants who
are matched to the extent that none display visu-
ally related reading diculties, which would con-
found the results, and all possess a suciently
high reading ability|determined at the time of
the experiment by using an aphasia assessment
battery. As the system is a general tool aimed at
3
Semantically reversible sentences such as The boy
was kissed by the girl are even more dicult, since
either noun phrase could be the subject.
all aphasics, the participants will not be screened
for aphasia type. The readability of the simpli-
ed text and the usability of the system will be
assessed by observation and interview; questions
will be posed to gauge subjects' comprehension of
both explicit and implicit material.
References
B. Baldwin. 1997. CogNIAC: high precision coref-
erence with limited knowledge and linguistic re-
sources. In Proceedings of a Workshop sponsored
by the ACL (Operational Factors in Practical, Ro-
bust Anaphora Resolution for Unrestricted Texts),
Universidad Nacional de Educacion a Distancia,
Madrid, Spain.
E. Briscoe and J. Carroll. 1995. Developing and eval-
uating a probabilistic LR parser of part-of-speech
and punctuation labels. In Proceedings of the 4th
ACL/SIGPARSE International Workshop on Pars-
ing Technologies, pages 48{58.
J. Carroll and E. Briscoe. 1996. Apportioning de-
velopment eort in a probabilistic LR parsing sys-
tem through evaluation. In Proceedings of the
ACL/SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 92{100.
R. Chandrasekar, C. Doran, and B. Srinivas. 1996.
Motivations and methods for text simplication.
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (COLING-96).
H. Cunningham, Y. Wilks, and R. Gaizauskas. 1996.
GATE|a general architecture for text engineering.
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics (COLING-96).
S. Devlin and J. Tait. 1998. The use of a psy-
cholinguistic database in the simplication of text
for aphasic readers. In J. Nerbonne. Linguistic
Databases. Lecture Notes. Stanford, USA: CSLI
Publications.
S. Devlin. 1999. Simplifying natural language text for
aphasic readers. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
Sunderland, UK.
D. Elworthy. 1994. Does Baum Welch re-estimation
help taggers? In Proceedings of the 4th ACL Con-
ference on Applied Natural Language Processing,
pages 53{58.
Y. Grodzinsky, K. Wexler, Y. Chien, S. Marakovitz,
and J. Solomon. 1993. The breakdown of binding
relations. Brain and Language, 45(3):396{422.
G. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross,
K. Miller, and R. Tengi. 1993. Five papers on
WordNet. Technical report, Princeton University,
Princeton, N.J.
G. Minnen and J. Carroll. Submitted. Fast and ro-
bust morphological generation in a practical NLP
system.
M. Osborne. Submitted. Minimum description
length-based models for practical grammar induc-
tion.
P. Quinlan. 1992. The Oxford Psycholinguistic
Database. Oxford University Press.
