Briefly Noted 
Computers, Language and Speech: For- 
mal Theories and Statistical Data 
Karen I. B. Sp~irck Jones, Gerald J. M. 
Gazdar, and Roger M. Needham (editors) 
(University of Cambridge, University of Sus- 
sex, and Microsoft Research Ltd) 
Published as Philosophical Transactions ofThe 
Royal Society, series A, volume 358, number 
1769, 15 April 2000; 206 pp. ISSN 1364-503X; 
single issues £55.00, $85.00; ACL member 
discounted price for this issue: £40.00, 
$60.00. (Order from Jacqueline Knapp, The 
Royal Society, 6 Carlton House Terrace, 
London SWIY 5AG, UK.) 
Thirteen invited papers from a two-day dis- 
cussion session held in September 1999 are 
collected in this issue of Philosophical Transac- 
tions of The Royal Society. All the papers have 
been revised and edited, and the discussion 
following the presentation of each paper has 
been transcribed and appended. In addition, 
the editors have contributed a paper-length 
introduction. The contents are as follows: 
"Introduction: Combining formal theories 
and statistical data in natural language 
processing" by Karen I. B. Sparck Jones, 
Gerald J. M. Gazdar and Roger M. Need- 
ham 
"Formal grammar and information theory: 
Together again?" by Fernando Pereira 
"Finite-state models, event logics and statis- 
tics in speech recognition" by Julie Carson- 
Berndsen 
"Statistical and logical reasoning in disam- 
biguation" by Stephen G. Puhnan 
"Towards a psycholinguistic computational 
model for morphological parsing" by R. 
Harald Baayen and Robert Schreuder 
"Information extraction from broadcast 
news" by Yoshihiko Gotoh and Steve Re- 
nals 
"Incorporating linguistic structure into statis- 
tical language models" by Ronald Rosen- 
feld 
"Incorporating linguistic theories of pronun- 
ciation variation into speech-recognition 
models" by Mari Ostendorf 
"The role of taxonomy in language ngineer- 
ing" by Geoffrey Sampson 
"Learning dependency transduction models 
from unannotated examples" by Hiyan A1- 
shawi and Shona Douglas 
"Stochastic text generation" by Jon Oberlan- 
der and Chris Brew 
"Probabilistic methods in spoken-dialogue 
systems" by Steve J. Young 
"Concept-to-speech synthesis by phonologi- 
cal structure matching" by P. A. Taylor 
"Prosody modelling in concept-to-speech 
generation: Methodological issues" by 
Kathleen R. McKeown and Shimei Pan 
The CHILDES Project: Tools for Ana- 
lyzing Talk (third edition) 
Volume h Transcription format and 
programs 
Volume II: The database 
Brian MacWhinney 
(Carnegie Mellon University) 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
2000, volume I: 366 pp, volume 2:418 pp; 
hardbound, ISBN 0-8058-2995-4 and 
0-8058-3572-5, $49.95 per volume; CD-ROM 
$39.95 
"\[These\] two volumes..,  document the three 
components of the CHILDES Project. \[The 
first\] is divided into two parts that pro- 
vide an introduction to the use of computa- 
tional tools for studying language learning. 
The first part is the CHAT manual, which 
describes the conventions and principles of 
CHAT transcription and recommends spe- 
cific methods for data collection and digitiza- 
tion. The second part is the CLAN manual, 
which describes the uses of the editor, sonic 
CHAT, and the various analytic commands. 
The book will be useful for both novice and 
experienced users of the CHILDES tools, as 
well as instructions and students working 
with transcripts of child language. 
"The second volume of this set describes 
in detail all of the corpora included in the 
CHILDES database. The conversational inter- 
actions in the corpora come from monolin- 
gual children and their caregivers and sib- 
lings, as well as bilingual children, older 
school-aged children, adult second-language 
learners, children with various types of lan- 
guage disabilities, and aphasics recovering 
from language loss. The database includes 
transcripts in 26 different languages. 
"The CD-ROM that accompanies these 
volumes includes the transcript files de- 
scribed in Volume II. It runs on both Win- 
dows and Macintosh platforms.'--From the 
publisher's announcement 
657 
Computational Linguistics Volume 26, Number 4 
UnicodeTM: A Primer 
Tony Graham 
(Mulberry Technologies Inc) 
Foster City, CA: M&T Books, 2000, 
li+475 pp; paperbound, ISBN 0-7645-4625-2, 
$24.99, Cdn$37.99, £23.99 
"Unicode is a character encoding standard 
that includes all of the major scripts of the 
world in a simple and consistent manner. 
It is an integral part of HTML 4.0 and XML 
. . . .  This book is a primer for Unicode and 
its uses . . . .  lit\] doesn't attempt o replicate 
the Unicode Standard. Instead, it . . .  intro- 
duces the principles of Unicode, describes 
both the Unicode Standard and the other ma- 
terial from the Unicode Consortium not in- 
cluded in the standard, \[and\] shows how the 
Unicode Standard is used on the Internet, 
in operating systems, and in programming 
languages.'--From the author's preface 
658 
