Briefly Noted 
The Structure of Multimodal 
Dialogue II 
M. Martin Taylor, Fran~oise N~el, and 
D. G. Bouwhuis (editors) 
(Defence and Civil Institute of Environmen- 
tal Medicine, Toronto, L1MSI-CNRS, Orsay, 
and IPO, Eindhoven) 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing 
Company, 2000, xviii+522 pp; hardbound, 
ISBN 90-272-2190-1 and 1-55619-762-4, 
Dfl 250.00, $125.00 
That the terms "dialogue" (e.g., between hu- 
mans) and "interaction" (e.g., between user 
and computer) can be used interchangeably 
is implicitly assumed throughout this collec- 
tion of papers edited by Taylor, N6el, and 
Bouwhuis. That a dialogue typically involves 
the use of multiple "modes" of communica- 
tion and that it has its own internal struc- 
ture are of obvious import to those who work 
in application domains that require the col- 
laboration of human users either with soft- 
ware systems or with one another through 
the use of mediating software systems. This 
collection, therefore, will be of interest o re- 
searchers who want to know about early at- 
tempts to apply the metaphor of multimodal 
human-human communication to collabora- 
tive domains uch as these. 
This volume is a long-delayed follow-up 
publication from a workshop held under the 
same title in Aquafredda di Maratea, Italy, in 
1991.1 The material in this volume is clearly 
not recent--the ditors report that the au- 
thors were requested to bring the papers up 
to date, but since practically all of the works 
referenced by the papers in this volume pre- 
date 1994, it seems that their request was not 
made in the years prior to publication. This is 
also reflected in the absence of the notion of 
a communicative agent (although, due to its 
now-rampant overuse, some might welcome 
this) and the lack of reference to the work 
on embodied agents that emerged in the last 
decade and is clearly relevant (for exam- 
1 When referenced in the research literature, the 
workshop is often confusingly referred to as 
the "Second Venaco Workshop," after the first 
workshop held in Venaco, Corsica, in 1989; the 
follow-up publication from that workshop is 
Taylor, N6el, and Bouwhuis (1989). 
pie, Cassell et al. \[19941 and much research 
since then). However, the publication of this 
volume does make previously difficult-to- 
find material more readily available and does 
provide an interesting historical context for 
contemporary esearch. 
The application of the metaphor of human- 
human communication to human-computer 
interaction is hardly new--descriptions and 
discussions predate the 1980s (e.g., Nick- 
erson 1977)--but it does invoke a cer- 
tain amount of theoretical baggage. Those 
papers in this volume that contain dis- 
cussions that address (however obliquely) 
such issues are perhaps of more enduring 
interest han those that describe implemen- 
tations. Of particular interest are attempts 
to define the notions of a mode, a modal- 
ity, and a medium of communication--such 
as those by Maybury and Lee, Teil and 
Beluk, and Taylor and Waugh. Such terms 
are used to distinguish among "manners" 
or "ways" of communicating, and part of 
the difficulty in defining them (evidenced 
in this volume by a lack of consensus) is 
that their meanings are indexical--their def- 
initions depend upon an underlying theory 
(or at least model) of communication. One 
such underlying theory of choice in this vol- 
ume is Layered Protocol Theory, which is dis- 
tinctly information-theoretic in flavor (unfor- 
ttmately, the description of this theory does 
not appear until chapter 25 of the 28 chap- 
ters). Another possible underlying theory, 
which is not explicitly adopted here, is pro- 
posed by Allwood in the introductory mate- 
rial (and is described in more detail in All- 
wood \[1995\]). Speech Act Theory receives 
scant attention. 
Only a subset of the papers take on the 
topic of dialogue structure that is suggested 
by the title The Structure of Multimodal Dia- 
logue II. Moreover, the editors' caveat that 
the collection is intended to inspire the in- 
teraction of cross-disciplinary ideas cannot 
excuse the poor quality of certain papers. 
This volume is certainly not a must-have, 
but some readers might find certain papers 
a complement to an existing collection of re- 
search literature concerned with the use of 
multiple modes of communication i  collabo- 
rative domains.--Melanie A. Baljko, University 
of Toronto 
601 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
References 
Allwood, Jens. 1995. An activity based 
approach to pragmatics. Gothenburg 
Papers in Theoretical Linguistics 76, 
University of G6teborg, Department of
Linguistics. 
Cassell, Justine, Mark Steedman, Norm 
Badler, Catherine Pelachaud, Matthew 
Stone, Brett Douville, Scott Prevost, and 
Brett Achorn. 1994. Modeling the 
interaction between speech and gesture. In 
Proceedings ofthe 16th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA. 
Nickerson, Raymond S. 1977. On 
conversational interaction with computers. 
In User-Oriented Design of Interactive Graphic 
Systems. ACM, New York, pages 101-113. 
Reprinted in Ronald M. Baecker and 
William A. S. Buxton, editors, Readings in 
Human-Computer Interaction: A
Multidisciplinary Approach. Morgan 
Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, pages 681-693. 
Taylor, M. Martin, Fran~oise N6el, and 
Don G. Bouwhuis. 1989. The Structure of 
Multimodal Dialogue. Elsevier Science 
Publishers, North Holland. 
Handbook of Natural Language Process- 
ing 
Robert Dale, Hermann Moisl, and Harold 
Somers (editors) 
(Macquarie University, University of New- 
castle, and UMIST) 
New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 2000, 
xviii+943 pp; hardbound, ISBN 
0-8247-9000-6, $195.00 
"Comprehensive in scope, this up-to-date 
handbook thoroughly explores the design 
and application of natural language text- 
based processing systems based on gener- 
ative linguistics, empirical corpus analysis, 
and artificial neural networks---emphasizing 
the design and implementation of the lan- 
guage input/output components of compu- 
tational systems for increased fluency and 
flexibility. 
"Adopting a historically based structure to 
the approaches of NLP, each self-contained 
section of the \[book\] provides an introduc- 
tory overview of the approach discussed, de- 
tails of fundamental concepts and procedures 
appropriate to the approach, and specific ap- 
plications in which the approach as been 
used successfully."--From the publisher's an- 
nouncement 
The contents of the volume are as follows: 
Part I: Symbolic approaches 
"Symbolic approaches to natural language 
processing" by Robert Dale 
"Tokenisation and sentence segmentation" 
by David D. Palmer 
"Lexical analysis" by Richard Sproat 
"Parsing techniques" by Christer Samuelsson 
and Mats Wir6n 
"Semantic analysis" by Massimo Poesio 
"Discourse structure and intention recogni- 
tion" by Karen E. Lochbaum, Barbara J. 
Grosz, and Candace L. Sidner 
"Natural anguage generation" by David D. 
McDonald 
"Intelligent writing assistance" by George E. 
Heidorn 
"Database interfaces" by Ion Androutsopou- 
los and Graeme Ritchie 
"Information extraction" by Jim Cowie and 
Yorick Wilks 
"The generation of reports from databases" 
by Richard I. Kittredge and Alain Polgu~re 
"The generation of multimedia presenta- 
tions" by Elisabeth Andr6 
"Machine translation" by Harold Somers 
"Dialogue systems: From theory to practice 
in TRAINS-96" by James Allen, George 
Ferguson, Bradford W. Miller, Eric K. Ring- 
ger, and Teresa Sikorski Zollo 
Part II: Empirical approaches 
"Empirical approaches to natural anguage 
processing" by Harold Somers 
"Corpus creation for data-intensive linguis- 
tics" by Henry S. Thompson 
"Part-of-speech tagging" by Eric Brill 
"Alignment" by Dekai Wu 
"Contextual word similarity" by Ido Dagan 
"Computing similarity" by Ludovic Lebart 
and Martin Rajman 
"Collocations" by Kathleen R. McKeown and 
Dragomir R. Radev 
"Statistical parsing" by John A. Carroll 
"Authorship identification and computa- 
tional stylometry" by Tony McEnery and 
Michael Oakes 
"Lexical knowledge acquisition" by Yuji Mat- 
sumoto and Takehito Utsuro 
"Example-based machine translation" by 
Harold Somers 
"Word-sense disambiguation" by David 
Yarowsky 
Part III: Artificial neural network ap- 
proaches 
"NLP based on artificial neural networks: In- 
troduction" by Herman Moisl 
"Knowledge representation" by Simon 
Haykin 
602 
Briefly Noted 
"Grammar inference, automata induction, 
and language acquisition" by Rajesh G. 
Parekh and Vasant Honavar 
"The symbolic approach to ANN-based nat- 
ural language processing" by Michael Wit- 
brock 
"The subsymbolic approach to ANN-based 
natural language processing" by Georg 
Dorffner 
"The hybrid approach to ANN-based natural 
language processing" by Stefan Wermter 
"Character recognition with syntactic neural 
networks" by Simon Lucas 
"Compressing texts with neural nets" by 
Jfirgen Schmidhuber and Stefan Heil 
"Neural architectures for information re- 
trieval and database query" by Chun- 
Hsien Chen and Vasant Honavar 
"Text data mining" by Dieter Merkl 
"Text and discourse understanding: The DIS- 
CERN system" by Risto Miikkulainen 
Where Mathematics, Computer Science, 
Linguistics, and Biology Meet: Essays 
in Honour of Gheorghe P~un 
Carlos Martin-Vide and Victor Mitrana 
(editors) 
(Rovira i Virgili University and University of 
Bucharest) 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
2001, xv+446 pp; hardbound, ISBN 
0-7923-6693-X, $176.00, £112.00, Dfl 360.00 
"There are not many scientific fields as in- 
terdisciplinary as formal anguage theory. In 
this volume, it is presented as the very inter- 
section point of Mathematics, Computer Sci- 
ence, Linguistics, and Biology. This book is a 
collection of papers which closely examines 
classical topics in computer science inspired 
by formal anguages, as well as showing new 
concepts and problems motivated in linguis- 
tics and biology. The papers are organized 
into four sections: Grammars and Grammar 
Systems, Automata, Languages and Combi- 
natorics, and Models of Molecular Comput- 
ing. They clearly prove the power, wealth, 
and vitality of the theory nowadays and 
sketch some trends for its future develop- 
ment. The volume is intended for an audi- 
ence of computer scientists, computational 
linguists, theoretical biologists, and any other 
people interested in dealing with the prob- 
lems and challenges of interdisciplinarity."-- 
From the publisher's announcement, with minor 
corrections 
"Our volume has two goals. One is to 
present some recent results in active areas of 
the three domains that converge in the new 
field. The other one is to celebrate the 50th 
birthday of Gheorghe Paun, who, from for- 
mal language theory, promoted the new re- 
search area and made seminal contributions 
to it .... All the papers are contributed by 
Gheorghe P~un's collaborators, colleagues, 
friends, and students in the five continents, 
who wanted to show in this way their recog- 
nition to him for his tremendous work. We 
have collected 38 papers by 75 authors here. 
(Another set of 38 papers by 65 authors will 
be published soon in the future.)"--From the 
editors" preface 
Recent Advances in Natural Language 
Processing Ih Selected Papers from 
RANLP "97 
Nicolas Nicolov and Ruslan Mitkov 
(editors) 
(University of Sussex and University of Wol- 
verhampton) 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins (Current issues 
in linguistic theory, volume 189), 2000, 
xi+422 pp; hardbound, ISBN 1-55619-966-X 
and 90-272-3695-X, $84.00 
"This volume brings together \[31\] revised 
versions of a selection of papers presented at 
the Second International Conference on 'Re- 
cent Advances in Natural Language Process- 
ing' (RANLP'97) held in Tzigov Chark, Bul- 
garia, 11-13 September 1997."--From the edi- 
tors'foreword 
Intelligent Help Systems for UNIX 
Stephen J. Hegner, Paul McKevitt, Peter 
Norvig, and Robert Wilensky (editors) 
(Ume~ University, University of Ulster, 
NASA Ames Research Center, and Univer- 
sity of California, Berkeley) 
Reprinted from Artificial Intelligence Review, 
14(1-5), 2000. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
2001, xii+420 pp (no index); hardbound, 
ISBN 0-7923-6641-7, $190.00, £135.00, 
(220.00 
This collection of papers concerns artificial- 
intelligence (AI) and cognitive-science tech- 
niques applied to the problem of providing 
help systems for the UNIX operating sys- 
603 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
tern. The research described here involves 
the representation f technical computer con- 
cepts, but also the representation of how 
users conceptualize such concepts. These sys- 
tems range from menu-based tonatural an- 
guage interfaces, ome providing active help, 
intervening when they believe the user to 
have misconceptions, and some based on 
empirical studies of what users actually do 
while using UNIX. Further papers investi- 
gate planning and knowledge representation 
where the focus is on discovering what the 
user wants to do, and figuring out a way to 
do it as well as representing the knowledge 
needed to do so. There is a focus on natural 
language dialogue where consultation sys- 
tems can become active, incorporating user 
modeling, natural anguage generation, and 
plan recognition, modeling metaphors and 
users' mistaken beliefs. 
The articles are derived from papers 
originally presented at a workshop en- 
titled "Knowledge Representation i  the 
UNIX Help Domain," organized by Pe- 
ter Norvig, Wolfgang Wahlster, and Ro- 
bert Wilensky at the University of Califor- 
nia, Berkeley, USA, in December 1987. The 
area of intelligent help systems for UNIX pro~ 
vides such a fruitful example domain of ap- 
plication for many All techniques that this 
work is still timely, more widely and par- 
ticularly now where we have many spoken 
dialogue systems applied to such fixed do- 
mains. Each article here has been reviewed 
by the editors and has been subsequently 
revised; furthermore, all authors have been 
asked to include a section on recent de- 
velopments in their work.--Adapted from 
the publisher's announcement and the editors" 
introduction 
604 
