Book Reviews 
The Significance of Word Lists 
Brett Kessler 
(Wayne State University) 
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications 
(Dissertations in linguistics, edited by 
Joan Bresnan, Sharon Inkelas, and Peter 
Sells), 2001, x+277 pp; distributed by 
the University of Chicago Press; 
hardbound, ISBN 1-57586-299-9, $65.00, 
£41.00; paperbound, ISBN 
1-57586-300-6, $23.00, £14.50 
Reviewed by 
Grzegorz Kondrak 
University of Toronto 
The idea that statistical significance tests can be applied to the task of determining re- 
latedness of languages is known to provoke rather emotional reactions. "Fallacious," 
"specious," circular, .... superficially plausible but in fact utterly unreliable," exhibit- 
ing innumeracy to a fatal degree"--these are epithets actually used by researchers 
to describe one another's work in this area. What is generally agreed upon is that 
languages of common origin normally exhibit more common traits than unrelated 
languages. The main difficulty is finding an objective and reliable measure of the 
probability that the regularities are not due to chance. 
A number of phenomena make such statistical comparisons difficult. First, lexical 
replacement s eadily decreases the number of cognates hared by related languages. 
Second, with the passage of time, words can radically change their phonetic form and 
sometimes also their meaning. Finally, lexical transfer of words between unrelated 
languages that come into contact further obscures the true nature of their relationship. 
Nevertheless, a number of proposals have been put forward, the most prominent being 
the method of Ringe, introduced in his 1992 monograph and refined in his subsequent 
papers. 
The new book by Kessler, based on his Ph.D. dissertation, is the most comprehen- 
sive work on the subject so far. It critically analyzes the previous approaches, points 
out a number of possible pitfalls of statistical testing, and proposes a novel solution 
to the problem. Although its main target audience is linguists interested in statistical 
argumentation, the book is also of computational interest. Kessler's approach crucially 
depends on computerized simulations, which are used in lieu of deduction in order 
to arrive at nontrivial results. Moreover, proper application of statistical reasoning is a 
topic of concern for many computational linguists. No deep background in historical 
linguistics is necessary for understanding the problems discussed in the book. 
In the opening chapters, Kessler clearly introduces the problem by means of sev- 
eral illuminating examples. He explains in detail the important difference between 
measures based on phonetic similarities and those focused on sound recurrences, and 
his reasons for preferring the latter. The previously proposed methods are carefully 
analyzed, and their linguistic biases and mathematical flaws are pointed out. The 
Book Reviews 
author then proposes his solution, which is based on permutation tests. In this tech- 
nique, a measure of relatedness i  computed for a pair of word lists representing two 
languages and then compared against he results calculated for a large number of ran- 
domly generated permutations of the lists. The probability of a historical connection 
between languages i  estimated by counting the percentage of random orderings that 
produce a higher value of the relatedness measure. 
In the second part of the book, the author discusses various phenomena that can 
compromise the validity of statistical testing. These include onomatopoeic words, bor- 
rowings, and language-internal cognates and regularities. Each analysis is concluded 
with an outline of practical procedures that should be taken to ensure the correctness 
of testing. 
In the remainder of the book, the author proposes other measures of relatedness 
that can be used besides the X 2 deviation statistic. These measures are designed to 
more closely correspond to intuitive techniques used by historical inguists. In order 
to evaluate the performance of the measures, Kessler employs a test suite of eight 
200-word lists representing languages that exhibit various degrees of mutual related- 
ness: English, French, German, Latin, Albanian, Turkish, Hawaiian, and Navajo. (The 
complete data are included in the appendix together with some etymological infor- 
mation.) A measure is considered to perform well if it finds a statistically significant 
correlation between languages if and only if they are known to be related. The ex- 
periments conducted by the author indicate that his method is powerful enough to 
establish medium-range r lationships such as French-English, which are unlikely to 
be demonstrable by traditional methods from the surface data alone. 
Kessler wisely refrains from making excessive claims about the power of signifi- 
cance testing. He suggests that statistical assessment should complement rather than 
replace the venerable comparative method. It may be particularly useful as a prelim- 
inary test in cases where an in-depth analysis has not yet been applied. Therefore, 
I find quite disappointing the author's refusal to use his method to evaluate any of 
the controversial hypotheses of relatedness. After investing a considerable ffort in 
developing and testing the measures, it would seem logical to try them on some of 
the hotly disputed cases, such as the Nostratic or Amerind families. Kessler prefers to 
leave that task to others, and provides a detailed description of steps to be followed 
"for those wishing to try this method for themselves." One can only hope that the 
comparative linguists will take up the suggestion. 
In my opinion, one of the book's main accomplishments is in showing the limits 
of statistical techniques. Unlike the traditional comparative method, statistical testing 
is more about sampling rather than analyzing the data. A linguist attempting to perform 
statistical testing is advised to discard a lot of potentially valuable data. For example, 
increasing the size of word lists and considering more than a single phonotactic po- 
sition are likely to weaken the power of a statistical test. Morphological information, 
which is considered particularly valuable by comparative linguists, is also better left 
out because its significance is difficult to evaluate statistically. Paradoxically, the more 
the experimenter knows about the tested languages, the more lexical items he is likely 
to disqualify, thus lowering the chances of obtaining a positive result. 
Great care has to be exercised in interpreting the result of a statistical test. If the 
result is negative, it must not be considered as evidence against a genetic relationship 
(cf. Baxter and Manaster Ramer 2000). Kessler points out that it is not even theoretically 
possible to show that two languages are unrelated. A positive result, on the other 
hand, can neither demonstrate nor decide historical connection between languages; 
it can merely state that there is some statistically significant correlation between two 
word lists. 
589 
Computational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 4 
The lack of a single universally accepted measure of relatedness and the ease with 
which new measures can be constructed is somewhat disturbing. Since measures are 
typically validated by applying them to a handful of language pairs, it is not surprising 
that so many of them have been shown to be flawed (both by Kessler and by other 
authors). Kessler's favorite R 2 metric does not look impregnable ither: it seems to 
me that in some cases accidental recurrences between frequent phonemes may easily 
overwhelm true recurrences between infrequent phonemes. 
A close look at the results produced by various measures proposed in the book 
reveals that most of the tested language pairs that have no known cognates neverthe- 
less exhibit statistically significant correlation according to some measure. This is not 
entirely surprising because for any fixed level of significance, a certain percentage of
false positives is to be expected. Kessler exhorts everybody who does statistical test- 
ing to report all unsuccessful tests together with the successful ones. However, he also 
notes that it is common in the literature on long-range comparisons to present only 
the most striking results. Unfortunately, the reliability of a statistical test depends to 
a large degree on the experimenter's zeal to eliminate various kinds of subtle biases, 
even when that may lead to a result contrary to his linguistic intuition. 
There is no simple procedure to verify the correctness of statistical testing. Due to 
the nondeterministic nature of the method, even rewriting the program and running 
it on the same data does not guarantee replicating the result. In general, Kessler is 
content with providing a single value reflecting the likelihood that the correlation 
between languages i statistically significant. Only rarely does he attempt to find out 
which pairs of words contribute a significant result. In my opinion, significance t sting 
is only the first step toward showing the relatedness. After discovering some kind of 
regularity in the data, the next logical step is to follow the trail and analyze the 
regularities on an individual basis. Kessler makes one step in this direction when he 
takes a closer look at the results of his W metric and enumerates the cognates that are 
implied by the experiment. This seems to be the right way to make the method more 
transparent and verifiable. 
Two important papers that are relevant o the subject are not mentioned in the 
book. Ringe (1998) "largely supersedes" Ringe's earlier work, which is discussed in 
great detail throughout the book. Baxter (1995) employs a method of multiple scram- 
bling of word lists that is very similar to Kessler's approach. 
Overall, the book exceeds in quality and detail most of what has previously been 
published on the subject. It is well written and coherent as a whole, and it covers all 
important aspects of the problem. Moreover, since none of the author's findings have 
been reported in article form, reading the book is the only way to get to know this 
interesting work. 
References 
Baxter, William H. 1995. 'A stronger affinity 
... than could have been produced by 
accident': A probabilistic comparison of 
Old Chinese and Tibeto-Burman. I  
W. S.-Y. Wang, editor, The Ancestry of 
Chinese Language. Project on Linguistic 
Analysis, Berkeley, pages 1-39. 
Baxter, William H. and Alexis Manaster 
Ramer. 2000. Beyond lumping and 
splitting: Probabilistic ssues in historical 
linguistics. In Colin Renfrew, April 
McMahon, and Larry Trask, editors, Time 
Depth in Historical Linguistics. The 
McDonald Institute for Archeological 
Research, Cambridge, UK, pages 167-188. 
Ringe, Don. 1992. On calculating the factor 
of chance in language comparison, 
Transactions ofthe American Philosophical 
Society, 82(1). 
Ringe, Don. 1998. Probabilistic evidence for 
Indo-Uralic. In Joseph C. Salmons and 
Brian D. Joseph, editors, Nostratic: Sifting 
the Evidence. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 
pages 153-197. 
590 
Book Reviews 
Grzegorz Kondrak is interested in computational pproaches tohistorical linguistics. He has pub- 
lished papers on the identification and alignment of cognates. Kondrak's address is: Department 
of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3G4; e-maih kon- 
drak@cs.toronto.edu; URL: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kondrak. 
591 
