582
Briefly Noted
Flexibility Principles in Boolean Seman-
tics: The Interpretation of Coordination,
Plurality, and Scope in Natural Language
Yoad Winter
(Technion, Israel Institute of Technology)
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press (Current
studies in linguistics, edited by Samuel Jay
Keyser, volume 37), 2001, xi+297 pp;
hardbound, ISBN 0-262-23218-9, $45.00
“Since the early work of Montague, Boolean
semantics and its subfield of generalized
quantifier theory have become the model-
theoretic foundation for the study of mean-
ing in natural languages. This book uses
this framework to develop a new semantic
theory of central linguistic phenomena in-
volving coordination, plurality, and scope.
The proposed theory makes use of the stan-
dard Boolean interpretation of conjunction,
a choice-function account of indefinites, and
a novel semantics of plurals that is not
based on the distributive/collective distinc-
tion. The key to unifying these mechanisms
is a version of Montagovian semantics that is
augmented by flexibility principles: seman-
tic operations that have no counterpart in
phonology.
“This is the first book to cover these ar-
eas in a way that is both linguistically com-
prehensive and formally explicit. On one
hand, it addresses questions of primarily lin-
guistic concern: the semantic functions of
words like and and or in different languages,
the interpretation of indefinites and their
scope, and the semantic typology of noun
phrases and predicates. On the other hand,
it addresses formal questions that are mo-
tivated by the treatment of these linguis-
tic problems: the use of Boolean algebras
in linguistics, the proper formalization of
choice functions within generalized quanti-
fier theory, and the extension of this the-
ory to the domain of plurality. While pri-
marily intended for readers with a back-
ground in theoretical linguistics, the book
will also be of interest to researchers and
advanced students in logic, computational
linguistics, philosophy of language, and ar-
tificial intelligence.”—From the publisher’s an-
nouncement
Spatial Language: Cognitive and Com-
putational Perspectives
Kenny R. Coventry and Patrick Olivier
(University of Plymouth and University of
York)
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2002, xi+283 pp; hardbound, ISBN
1-4020-0208-4, $100.00, £69.00, C– 110.00
“The chapters in the present volume reflect
a commitment to the development of cogni-
tively informed computational treatments of
spatial language and spatial representation.
Therefore the chapters present computational
work, empirical work, or a combination of
both.”—From the publisher’s announcement
The contents of the volume are as follows:
“Reasoning about shape using the tangential
axis transform or the shape’s ‘grain’ ” by
Geoffrey Edwards
“A conceptual model for representing
verbal expressions used in route
descriptions” by Agne`s Gryl, Bernard
Moulin, and Driss Kettani
“Resolving ambiguous descriptions through
visual information” by Ingo Duwe, Klaus
Kessler, and Hans Strohner
“An anthropomorphic agent for the use of
spatial language” by Tanja Jo¨rding and
Ipke Wachsmuth
“Gesture, thought, and spatial language” by
Karen Emmorey and Shannon Casey
“Organization of temporal situations” by
Nancy Franklin and Todd Federico
“Grounding meaning in visual knowledge.
A case study: Dimensional adjectives” by
Anna Goy
“Understanding how we think about space”
by Christina Manning, Maria D. Sera, and
Herbert L. Pick, Jr.
“The real story of ‘over’?” by Kenny R.
Coventry and Gayna Mather
“Generating spatial descriptions from a
cognitive point of view” by Robert Porzel,
Martin Jansche, and Ralf Meyer-Klabunde
“Multiple frames of reference in interpreting
complex projective terms” by Carola
Eschenbach, Christopher Habel, and
Annette Leßmo¨llmann
“Goal-directed effects on processing a
spatial environment. Indications from
583
Briefly Noted
memory and language” by Holly A.
Taylor and Susan J. Naylor
“Memory for text and memory for space.
Two concurrent memory systems?” by
Monika Wagener-Wender
Corpus Linguistics at Work
Elena Tognini-Bonelli
(University of Lecce and the Tuscan Word
Center)
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
Company (Studies in corpus linguistics,
edited by Elena Tognini-Bonelli, volume 6),
2001, xi+223 pp; hardbound, ISBN
1-58811-061-3 and 90-272-2276-2, $57.00,
C– 63.00
“The book offers a combined discussion of
the main theoretical, methodological and ap-
plication issues related to corpus work. Thus,
starting from the definition of what is a cor-
pus and why reading a corpus calls for a dif-
ferent methodology from reading a text, the
underlying assumptions behind corpus work
are discussed. The two main approaches to
corpus work are discussed as the ‘corpus-
based’ and the ‘corpus-driven’ approach and
the theoretical positions underlying them ex-
plored in detail. The book adopts and exem-
plifies the parameters of the corpus-driven
approach and posits a new unit of linguis-
tic description defined systematically in the
light of corpus evidence. The applications
where the corpus-driven approach is exem-
plified are language teaching and contrastive
linguistics. Alternating between practical ex-
amples and theoretical evaluation, the reader
is led step-by-step to a detailed understand-
ing of the issues involved in corpus work
and, at the same time, tempted to explore
for himself some of the major applications
where a corpus-driven methodology can re-
veal unprecedented insights into linguistic
patterning.”—From the publisher’s announce-
ment
Phrase Structure Composition and Syn-
tactic Dependencies
Robert Frank
(Johns Hopkins University)
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press (Current
studies in linguistics, edited by Samuel Jay
Keyser, volume 34), 2002, xiv+324 pp;
hardbound, ISBN 0-232-06229-1, $40.00
“In Phrase Structure Composition and Syntactic
Dependencies, Robert Frank explores an ap-
proach to syntactic theory that weds Tree
Adjoining Grammar (TAG) formalism with
the minimalist framework. TAG has been ex-
tensively studied both for its mathematical
properties and for its usefulness in computa-
tional linguistics applications. Frank shows
that incorporating TAG’s formally restrictive
operations for structure building consider-
ably simplifies the model of grammatical
competence, particularly in the components
concerned with syntactic movement and lo-
cality. The empirical advantages of the re-
sulting model, illustrated with extensive case
studies of subject-raising constructions and
wh-questions, point toward a conception of
grammar that is sharply limited in its com-
putational power.”—From the publisher’s an-
nouncement
