Briefly Noted
English for the Computer:
The SUSANNE Corpus and Analytic
Scheme
Geoffrey Sampson
(University of Sussex)
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995,1 ix+499 pp;
hardbound, ISBN 0-19-824023-6, $115.00,
£79.00
Over the past 10–20 years, there has been
increasing interest in grammatical / syntac-
tic annotation schemes for corpora. Anno-
tated corpora are essential for training and
testing taggers and parsers, for describing
the use of lexical and grammatical features,
and for comprehensive analyses of registers
or sublanguages. Several annotation schemes
have been developed over this period, in-
cluding both tagsets (see the survey by Leech
[1997]) and parsing schemes for syntactic
treebanks (see the survey by Leech and Eyes
[1997]).
The SUSANNE analytic scheme is proba-
bly the most detailed and explicit of these
annotation frameworks. In this 500-page
book, Sampson describes every detail of the
scheme, which is based on a multiyear analy-
sis and annotation of the SUSANNE Corpus.
This book has different goals from most
corpus-based studies. It does not present the
results of corpus analysis or describe new ap-
proaches or tools for natural language pro-
cessing. Instead, the goals here address the
need for a standard. At present, every re-
search group has its own set of standards
for corpus annotation, resulting in unnec-
essary preprocessing when corpora are ex-
changed across sites, and making it difficult
to compare evaluations of corpus analysis
tools. (For example, it is notoriously diffi-
cult to compare accuracy rates for taggers
because they vary so widely in the range of
phenomena annotated.) Sampson proposes
a comprehensive annotation scheme, cover-
ing part-of-speech tagging, surface grammar,
and issues of underlying “logical grammar,”
with the hope that the scheme might pro-
vide the basis for a widely adopted stan-
dard.
To develop the annotation scheme, Samp-
son and his colleagues manually annotated
1 Received for review, May 2001.
the 130,000-word SUSANNE Corpus. This
corpus has had several lives. It began as a
subset of the Brown Corpus, selected from
four text categories: press reportage, belles
lettres, “learned” prose, and adventure fic-
tion. That subcorpus was manually analyzed
by Alvar Ellega?rd and colleagues at Gothen-
burg University and came to be known as the
Gothenburg Corpus. Sampson’s team then
analyzed this same subcorpus in greater de-
tail, together with a small sample of speech
from the London-Lund Corpus, resulting in
the SUSANNE Corpus.
The book under review documents the
hundreds of decisions required for this an-
notation process. This resource should prove
useful for researchers faced with these same
decisions during corpus analysis. However,
the level of detail will sometimes over-
whelm computational and corpus linguists
attempting to develop automatic taggers and
parsers. Many of these decisions clearly
require a human analyst, and thus it is
not clear how useful they will be for ma-
chine processing. Others end up seeming
arbitrary, despite the detailed justifications.
For example, Flagstaff —my home town—is
tagged as a common noun (page 87), be-
cause the word originally referred to a flag-
pole. In contrast, Greenwood is tagged as
a proper noun (page 88), because it was
originally the surname of a colonist. These
principles seem clear, even if nearly im-
possible to implement automatically. How-
ever, I had trouble reconciling those deci-
sions with the tagging of Red as a proper
noun (masculine forename) in Red Hogan
but as an adjective in V. E. (Red) Berry
(page 138).
I suspect that Sampson would not be
bothered by such criticisms. He did not
set out to develop the perfect annotation
scheme, and he readily agrees that his
scheme—like all others—has controversial
points. What makes this scheme unique is
its attempt to be comprehensive and ex-
plicit about all details. In this respect, cor-
pus researchers will find themselves relying
on this reference book increasingly as they
work toward the goal of readily exchange-
able resources.—Douglas Biber, Northern Ari-
zona University
102
Briefly Noted
References
Leech, Geoffrey. 1997. Grammatical tagging.
In Roger Garside, Geoffrey Leech, and
Tony McEnery, editors, Corpus Annotation:
Linguistic Information from Computer Text
Corpora. Longman, London, pages 19–33.
Leech, Geoffrey and Elizabeth Eyes. 1997.
Syntactic annotation: Treebanks. In Roger
Garside, Geoffrey Leech, and Tony
McEnery, editors, Corpus Annotation:
Linguistic Information from Computer Text
Corpora. Longman, London, pages 34–52.
Mathematical Foundations of
Information Retrieval
Sa´ndor Dominich
(University of Veszpre´m)
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers
(Mathematical modelling: Theory and
applications, edited by R. Lowen,
volume 12), 2001, xxi+284 pp; hardbound,
ISBN 0-7923-6861-4, $107.00, £67.00, C{ 99.00
While libraries have long stored informative
material for later use, information retrieval as
we now know it did not begin to coalesce as
a discipline until the 1960s and early 1970s,
with advances in commercial systems and in-
fluential research publications by scholars in-
cluding Lancaster, Maron, Salton, and Sparck
Jones. While commercial systems of the time
most commonly accepted Boolean queries as
input, describing the relationships desired
between human-assigned index terms in the
documents to be retrieved, researchers be-
gan developing models and software con-
sistent with term-weighting systems; these
evolved into the methods used by today’s
search engines in ranking documents. While
many of the term-weighting and automatic
indexing schemes were initially rather sim-
ple, they have grown in complexity, based
on developments in retrieval and linguistic
theory and years of experimentation. While
more sophisticated linguistic methods have
been studied in retrieval contexts nearly as
long as retrieval itself has been studied, the
relative level of satisfaction with the per-
formance of retrieval systems using simple
automated indexing has kept the linguistic
focus of retrieval researchers on individual
terms, usually assuming a “bag of terms”
model.
Dominich summarizes many of the math-
ematical foundations of various information
retrieval models. Chapter 2 provides the core
mathematical material in the book. A wide
range of concepts is presented, with a sec-
tion for each of the following: logic, set the-
ory, relations, functions, families of sets, al-
gebra, calculus, differential equations, vec-
tors, probability, fuzzy sets, metric spaces,
topology, graph theory, matroid theory, re-
cursion and complexity theory, and artificial
neural networks. The sections are typically
broken down into formal definitions, theo-
rems, and examples. The definitions and the-
orems are clear and relatively easy to under-
stand. Those seeking longer or deeper mathe-
matical expositions on these topics will need
to go to the mathematical literature; how-
ever, in most cases, the material provided
by Dominich will be adequate for linguists
and retrieval specialists trying to understand
retrieval models. The chapter has little on
the relative strengths, weaknesses, and con-
sequences of the adoption of particular math-
ematical paradigms, which may be frustrat-
ing to those asking “Why?” The numeric or
symbolic examples provided at the ends of
many sections are brief but very useful.
Chapter 3 addresses retrieval models, with
one-third of the chapter addressing tradi-
tional text retrieval models (Boolean, vec-
tor, and probabilistic), one-third addressing
“nonclassical” models that have yet to see
much commercial use but would be of inter-
est to philosophers and linguists (e.g., ideas
based on the works of Barwise and Dev-
lin), and one-third addressing “alternative”
models of information retrieval, including
a presentation on latent semantic indexing
(four pages) and natural language process-
ing (one page). Other brief discussions of
techniques using linguistic information are
spread throughout the chapters.
Chapter 4 addresses how information re-
trieval, as modeled in Chapter 3, may be
based rigorously on the mathematics pre-
sented in Chapter 2. Much of this consti-
tutes original research. It is helpful to see
the work of a variety of authors brought
together into the uniform presentation pro-
vided by Dominich. Chapter 5 formally ex-
amines retrieval effectiveness. This presenta-
tion goes into far more depth than do most
information retrieval books and provides a
helpful summary of the foundations of the
103
Computational Linguistics Volume 28, Number 1
area. The appendices contain algorithms and
MathCAD code for several retrieval models.
The book uses a section-numbering style
where the chapter number isn’t at the begin-
ning of each section number, nor is the chap-
ter number in the header or the footer for
most pages. This makes navigating through
the book unnecessarily difficult.
Mathematical Foundations of Information Re-
trieval will be useful to those computational
linguists who want an accessible yet mathe-
matically rigorous presentation of the foun-
dations of information retrieval algorithms
and models.—Robert Losee, University of North
Carolina
104
