149
Briefly Noted
The Spoken Language Translator
Manny Rayner, David Carter, Pierrette
Bouillon, Vassilis Digalakis, and Mats
Wire´n (editors)
(SRI International, Speech Machines, Univer-
sity of Geneva, Technical University of Crete,
and Telia Research)
Cambridge University Press (Studies in
natural language processing, edited by
Branimir Boguraev), 2000, xviii+337 pp;
hardbound, ISBN 0-521-77077-7, $59.95
The Spoken Language Translator consists of
21 chapters contributed by different authors
who worked on the building of components
and/or the overall system for the Spoken
Language Translator (SLT), an early project
in the area of automatic speech translation.
The book presents a detailed description of
various technologies developed during the
period of the SLT project, with an empha-
sis on language and linguistic processing. It
includes four parts: language processing and
corpora, linguistic coverage, speech process-
ing, and evaluation and conclusions.
The SLT used a multiengine machine
translation architecture. The main machine
translation engine is a complex, unification
grammar–based system intended to perform
deep analysis and to produce high-quality
output. The authors claim that the hand-
coded grammars used in SLT are linguisti-
cally motivated and generic in nature. There-
fore, the grammar coverage is broad, and it
is feasible to use these methods in serious
applications. However, the translation task
was evaluated only in the domain of air
travel reservations. The authors also worked
on methods to convert grammars generated
for English to corresponding grammars for
French and Swedish, as well as the possi-
bility of writing a single large grammar for
two closely related languages. The grammar-
based subsystem is responsible for structural
translation via the quasi-logical form transfer
method.
Another translation engine used in SLT is
a simple word-to-word system, intended for
shallow processing, speed, robustness, and
broad coverage. The word-to-word transla-
tion component simply uses rules to asso-
ciate a source language phrase of one or
more words with a target language phase of
zero or more words. Source language words
may be tagged with part-of-speech labels.
This technique was intended to fill in the
gaps (i.e., to translate utterances that are not
covered by the grammars, including utter-
ances that are grammatically incorrect, such
as speech recognition errors or disfluencies
in spontaneous speech).
The speech recognition technology used in
SLT was a state-of-the-art hidden Markov
model–based approach, with some interest-
ing new techniques, such as discrete-mixture
models, which run two to three times faster
than continuous-density models with similar
recognition performance. The speech recog-
nition system was developed for multilin-
gual speech and is capable of decoding a
word string in any of a given set of lan-
guages. Both acoustic modeling and lan-
guage modeling issues for a multilingual
recognition system are addressed. Text-to-
speech translation is an inevitable part of
a speech-to-speech translation system. How-
ever, text-to-speech technology is not con-
sidered in this book, and prosody transla-
tion and prosody transfer are described only
briefly.
A series of empirical evaluation experi-
ments is thoroughly described and the re-
sults analyzed in chapter 20. Although all
evaluations are subjective, several fine scales
are used for quality judgment. Furthermore,
the main system performance is compared
when variations are generated either by re-
placing selected components or changing the
values of the critical parameters. One inter-
esting study discussed in this chapter is on
“pipeline synergy,” which is based on the
intuition that “utterances that are hard to
hear are also hard to understand and trans-
late.” The authors show that assuming that
error rates for the individual components
are independent can lead to serious overesti-
mates of the system error rate. This chapter is
worthwhile for readers who are interested in
performance evaluation of speech-to-speech
translation systems.
In general, this book is a useful resource
for those who are interested in knowing
how to build a speech-to-speech translation
system, especially for those who are inter-
ested in grammar-based language processing
approaches.—Yuqing Gao, IBM T. J. Watson Re-
search Center
150
Computational Linguistics Volume 29, Number 1
Yuqing Gao works on problems of large-vocabulary speech
recognition and of speech-to-speech translation. She has
been a research staff member at IBM T. J. Watson Re-
search Center since 1995. Her address is IBM T. J. Wat-
son Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, e-mail:
yuqing@us.ibm.com.
Many Morphologies
Paul Boucher (editor)
(University of Nantes)
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press, 2002,
xv+267 pp; paperbound, ISBN
1-57473-025-8, $28.95
“The title of this collection of articles, Many
Morphologies, is an allusion not only to the va-
riety of morphological problems discussed,
but also to the diversity of formal solutions
offered by the authors. The papers exam-
ine Polish derivational morphology, French
and English compounding, pluralization in
Luisen˜o and Somali, and more, and though
almost all of the papers are written in the
generative grammar framework, there are
considerable differences between the formal
methods they apply to the problems at hand.
We also include two papers which discuss
computational morphology, one an overview
of the current state of the field and the
other an in-depth study of a current research
project.”—From the introduction
Parallel Corpora, Parallel Worlds
Lars Borin (editor)
(Uppsala University)
Amsterdam: Editions Rodopi (Language
and computers: Studies in practical
linguistics 43, edited by Jan Aarts and
Willem Meijs), 2002, vii+220 pp; hardbound,
ISBN 90-420-1530-6, $50.00, C– 50.00
The volume contains selected papers from a
symposium on parallel and comparable cor-
pora that was held at Uppsala University in
April 1999:
“. . . And never the twain shall meet?” by
Lars Borin
“Towards a multilingual corpus for
contrastive analysis and translation
studies” by Stig Johansson
“The PLUG project: Parallel corpora in
Linko¨ping, Uppsala, Gotebo¨rg: Aims and
achievements” by Anna Sa?gvall Hein
“The Uppsala Student English Corpus
(USE): A multi-faceted resource for
research and course development” by
Margareta Westergren Axelsson and Ylva
Berglund
“How can linguists profit from parallel
corpora?” by Raphael Salkie
“Parallel corpora as tools for investigating
and developing minority languages” by
Trond Trosterud
“Reversing a Swedish–English dictionary
for the Internet” by Christer Geisler
“Multilingual corpus-based extraction and
the Very Large Lexicon” by Gregory
Grefenstette
“The PLUG Link Annotator—Interactive
construction of data from parallel
corpora” by Magnus Merkel, Mikael
Andersson, and Lars Ahrenberg
“Building and processing a multilingual
corpus of parallel texts” by Peter Stahl
“Uplug—A modular corpus tool for parallel
corpora” by Jo¨rg Tiedemann
“Part-of-speech tagging for Swedish” by
Klas Prutz
“Alignment and tagging” by Lars Borin
Computational Linguistics in the Nether-
lands 2001
Marie¨t Theune, Anton Nijholt, and Hendri
Hondrop (editors)
(University of Twente)
Amsterdam: Editions Rodopi (Language
and computers: Studies in practical
linguistics 45, edited by Jan Aarts and
Willem Meijs), 2002, viii+207 pp;
hardbound, ISBN 90-420-0943-8, $50.00,
C– 50.00
The volume contains selected papers from
the 12th Computational Linguistics in the
Netherlands meeting, Enschede, November
2001:
“Ideas on multi-layer dialogue management
for multi-party, multi-conversation,
multi-modal communication” by David
R. Traum
“The Alpino dependency treebank” by
Leonoor van der Beek, Gosse Bouma, Rob
Malouf, and Gertjan van Noord
“Corpus-based acquisition of collocational
prepositional phrases” by Gosse Bouma
and Begon˜a Villada
151
Briefly Noted
“Conservative vs set-driven learning
functions for the classes k-valued” by
Christophe Costa Floreˆncio
“Memory-based phoneme-to-grapheme
conversion” by Bart Decadt, Jacques
Duchateau, Walter Daelemans, and
Patrick Wambacq
“Tagging the Dutch PAROLE corpus” by
Jesse de Does and John van der Voort van
der Kleij
“A named entity recognition system for
Dutch” by Fien De Meulder, Walter
Daelemans, and Ve´ronique Hoste
“Reference resolution in context” by Jan van
Eijck
“Accurate stemming of Dutch for text
classification” by Tanja Gaustad and
Gosse Bouma
“Incremental generation of self-corrections
using underspecification” by Markus
Guhe and Frank Schilder
“Creating a Dutch information retrieval test
corpus” by Djoerd Hiemstra and David
van Leeuwen
“Performance grammar: A declarative
definition” by Gerard Kempen and Karin
Harbusch
“Multi-feature error detection in spoken
dialogue systems” by Piroska Lendvai,
Antal van den Bosch, Emiel Krahmer, and
Marc Swerts
“Applying Monte Carlo techniques to
language identification” by Arjen
Poutsma
“Automated compounding as a means for
maximizing lexical coverage” by Vincent
Vandeghinste
