510
Briefly Noted
Une grammaire e´lectronique du franc¸ais
Anne Abeille´
(Universite´ Denis Diderot (Paris VII))
Paris: CNRS E´ditions (Collection sciences
du langage, edited by Christian Hudelot),
2002, 396 pp; paperbound, ISBN
2-271-05824-4, C– 38.00
This recent publication by CNRS Publica-
tions is a reworked version of Abeille´’s 1991
doctoral dissertation. It presents, in consid-
erable detail, the tree adjunction grammar
(TAG) formalism used, and the details of the
French grammar written in that formalism.
This book is worthy of notice because of its
thoroughness in presenting a complete gram-
mar of French for computational use, though,
of course, the content is accessible only to
readers of French.
Chapter 1 is an overview of the TAG
framework used throughout the book. Chap-
ter 2 discusses the basic properties of French
and justifies the fact that the analyses do use
a VP. Chapter 3 is an overview of elementary
trees and lexical categories. Chapter 4 dis-
cusses further categories of elementary trees.
Chapter 5 addresses long-distance depen-
dencies and extraction phenomena. Chapter
6 discusses noncompositional expressions.
Chapter 7 covers implementation issues and
some testing results. The book ends with a
conclusion and two appendices, one on the
formal properties of TAG and one on French
TAG grammar.
The overview of the TAG formalism is
very well done. It is pedagogically sound,
and French speakers would find it a good
overview of pertinent work and of the as-
pects of a TAG relevant for a grammar writer.
Although a novice in the TAG framework, I
found myself well prepared to understand
the specifics of the following chapters de-
voted to French constructions.
The sections on French-specific issues
(auxiliaries, clitics, past-participle agreement)
and the presentation of the elementary trees
are both clear and illustrate well how the
framework can be used to generate the right
results. The details are complex and will re-
quire an advanced understanding of the lin-
guistic issues of French syntax. One naturally
makes allowances for the fact that the work
covers all of the syntax of French, no small
task.
The impression that emerges from read-
ing this book is that creating a grammar in
TAG would require a lot of effort—for the
trees as well as for the complex lexical items.
This seems to be borne out by the relatively
small lexicon (7,500 items) that the system
uses (p. 289), even though the development
time spans over 10 years. Size, performance,
and coverage, though briefly documented,
also seem to be of lesser importance, as this is
a theoretical implementation as much as, or
more than, a usable computational grammar.
A detail that I find unconvincing from a
linguistic perspective is the account of island
constraints. The island nature of a comple-
ment clause is accounted for (p. 239) by stat-
ing that it results from a substitution oper-
ation rather than attachment to a foot node
(nœud pied). Since no reference to previous
work appears here, one is led to believe this
is a new explanation, and one that struck me
as mechanical and unconvincing.
From a practical point of view, I cannot
agree with the insistence, led by theoreti-
cal concerns, that the grammar be generative
(i.e., able to reject ungrammatical input). My
work on grammar in industrial contexts has
convinced me that “real” corpora are flawed
in form and rarely conform to the theoreti-
cal assumptions of grammar writers. I would
have welcomed some estimation of how this
grammar might apply in real contexts.—Jessie
Pinkham, Microsoft Research
Natural Language Processing for On-
line Applications: Text Retrieval, Extrac-
tion, and Categorization
Peter Jackson and Isabelle Moulinier
(Thomson Legal & Regulatory)
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
Company (Natural language processing
series, edited by Ruslan Mitkov, volume 5),
2002, x+225 pp; hardbound, ISBN
90-272-4988-1 and 1-58811-249-7, $68.00,
C– 75.00; paperbound, ISBN 90-272-4989-X
and 1-58811-250-0, $29.95, C– 33.00
Jackson and Moulinier’s book introduces ap-
plied natural language processing to an au-
dience that need not have any prior knowl-
edge of the field or of linguistic issues. But it
is not NLP for Dummies; it respects the intel-
ligence of its readers (apart from a few too-
glib jokes in the first chapter) and doesn’t
511
Briefly Noted
shy away from serious mathematics where
the treatment warrants it.
The introductory chapter covers the goals
of NLP and fundamental tools such as to-
kenizers, part-of-speech taggers, and simple
name recognizers. The four main chapters of
the book then cover document retrieval from
collections and from the Web, information
extraction, text categorization, named-entity
and coreference recognition, and automatic
summarization.
Thus, unlike the standard large and com-
prehensive computational linguistics text-
books (Jurafsky and Martin 2000; Manning
and Schu¨tze 1999) and handbooks (Dale,
Moisl, and Somers 2000; Mitkov 2003), Jack-
son and Moulinier’s book is concise and fo-
cused on the goal of building applications.
The book is therefore a useful resource for
those who want to find out quickly about
NLP without learning everything there is to
know about computational linguistics and
NLP. A reader who completes the book will
be well-equipped then to learn more by read-
ing selectively from the textbooks and hand-
books.
Readers of this journal who work in in-
dustry will want to recommend the book
to coworkers, such as project managers and
software engineers, whose experience is in
other fields; those who work in universities
will want to recommend it as prereading to
keen undergraduates. And any reader of this
journal will find it a helpful consolidation of
up-to-date material that is presently scattered
around conference proceedings and journal
articles.—Graeme Hirst, University of Toronto
References
Dale, Robert, Hermann Moisl, and Harold
Somers, editors. 2000. Handbook of Natural
Language Processing. Marcel Dekker, New
York.
Jurafsky, Daniel and James Martin. 2000.
Speech and Language Processing.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Manning, Christopher and Hinrich Schu¨tze.
1999. Foundations of Statistical Natural
Language Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Mitkov, Ruslan, editor. 2003. The Oxford
Handbook of Computational Linguistics.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Defining Language: A Local Grammar
of Definition Sentences
Geoff Barnbrook
(University of Birmingham)
Amsterdam: John Benjamins (Studies in
corpus linguistics, edited by Elena
Tognini-Bonelli, volume 11), 2002,
xv+280 pp; hardbound, ISBN 90-272-2281-9
and 1-58811-298-5, $79.00, C– 88.00.
“This book describes the analysis of the main
features of the language used in English defi-
nition sentences, using as a corpus the defini-
tions contained in the Collins Cobuild Student’s
Dictionary. It examines the usefulness of the
information provided by dictionaries in natu-
ral language processing work and the nature
of the language used in dictionary definitions
in general and in the Cobuild range in par-
ticular. It provides a general survey of mono-
lingual English dictionaries, including a brief
history of their development, and a detailed
investigation of the nature of learners’ dictio-
naries and their special features. The concept
of sublanguages is examined, together with
the justification for regarding definition sen-
tences as a sublanguage and for the appli-
cation to them of a local grammar of defini-
tion. Grammars and parsers are considered
in general terms, and in their relevance to
the creation of a model for the language of
definitions.
“The methodology adopted for the devel-
opment of the language model is described,
together with a detailed account of the tax-
onomy, local grammar, and associated parser
developed for definition sentences. The im-
plications of the results of the analysis and
future possible applications of the taxon-
omy, grammar, and parser are described and
assessed.”—From the pre´cis of the book
