525
Briefly Noted
The Lexical Basis of Sentence Process-
ing: Formal, Computational, and Exper-
imental Issues
Paola Merlo and Suzanne Stevenson
(editors)
(University of Geneva and University of
Toronto)
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing
Company (Natural language processing
series, edited by Ruslan Mitkov, volume 4),
2002, viii+362 pp; hardbound, ISBN
90-272-4987-3 and 1-58811-156-3, $100.00,
C– 110.00
This volume contains 15 papers from a spe-
cial session held at the 11th CUNY Sen-
tence Processing Conference (1998). There are
three thematically arranged sections: propos-
als from theoretical linguistics, the lexicon–
syntax relationship as regards processing,
and the content of lexical entries. The first
chapter summarizes the papers and dis-
cusses the broader issues raised in the book.
(The full list of the papers is available from
the publisher’s Web page.)
There are many interesting and original
contributions from computational and be-
havioral perspectives. These shed new light
on open questions such as modularity in sen-
tence processing, the distinction between lex-
ical and structural processing, and argument
structure relations with respect to verbal lex-
ical entries.
This book is an excellent resource for re-
searchers interested in human language pro-
cessing, and the computational linguist in-
terested in the connection between proba-
bilistic parsing and human sentence process-
ing will find a number of the papers very
satisfying.—Shravan Vasishth, Universita¨t des
Saarlandes
Virtual Humans: A Build-It-Yourself Kit,
Complete with Software and Step-by-
Step Instructions
Peter Plantec
New York: Amacom (American
Management Association), 2004,
xviii+279 pp and CD-ROM; paperbound,
ISBN 0-8144-7221-4, $34.95
Most researchers of embodied conversa-
tional agents (ECAs), or as Peter Plantec
prefers to call them, virtual humans (V-
humans), know only too well that there’s
nothing that annoys a computational linguist
quite as much as an interactive animated
conversational character. This is especially
true if regular people really enjoy playing
with it—as they often do. For the traditional-
ist, the use of a graphical character is a cheat,
a conjuror’s misdirection aimed at fooling
the naive user.
This book will do little to ease the ag-
gravation. Indeed its folksy psychology and
sweeping characterization of linguistics and
cognitive psychology will only heighten the
sensation. This said, academic and nonaca-
demic books on ECAs are few and far be-
tween, and here Plantec demonstrates that
there is rather more to his notion of a V-
human than a few hastily composed regu-
lar expressions. This was never going to be
a book on computational linguistics but is
rather a guide to faking personality, and for
this Plantec is unapologetic. While his science
is suspect, it’s easy to argue that his focus on
personality is well founded, as recent fund-
ing initiatives in cognitive and computational
studies of emotion demonstrate.
Describing the contents of a book like this
is a challenge too far. Plantec skips from the
V-human market to a characterization of con-
sciousness and synthetic thinking, all in the
first three chapters. Much of the remainder
of the book is peppered with informal ac-
counts of the syntax and capabilities of par-
ticular pattern-matching formats and anima-
tion schemes. While there’s little coherence,
there is a genuine wealth of information as
to the art of building engaging patterns of
conversation and graphical behavior.
Plantec’s accounts of different V-human
technologies (most of which are in fact rather
accessible) are limited to chatterbots but still
are of practical value and could serve as
a useful introduction to anyone very new
to ECAs and interested in quickly building
some kind of system. Personally, I would
have bought the book for the accompanying
CD, which includes samples of graphical au-
thoring tools, chatterbots, and a few lovely
pieces of video and audio footage of past sys-
tems.
In the book’s introduction, Ray Kurzweil
predicts ECAs with humanlike capabilities
by the 2030s. Of course, all this tells us is
that he’s probably not expecting to be around
then. Chatterbots coupled to Microsoft Agent
are not the future of ECAs, and this imper-
526
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 4
fect account of their moderate success (if only
in engaging the casual user) is only possibly
worth a second look. However, it very prob-
ably is a great starting point for some enjoy-
able undergraduate projects.—Patrick Olivier,
Lexicle
Semantic Relations and the Lexicon:
Antonymy, Synonymy, and Other
Paradigms
M. Lynne Murphy
(University of Sussex)
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press, 2003, ix+292 pp; hardbound, ISBN
0-521-78067-5, $65.00
An understanding of semantic relations, such
as hyponymy and synonymy, is important in
many applications in natural language pro-
cessing, and typically such relations are pre-
determined and listed in the system’s lexi-
con or other “lexical resource.” WordNet is
the resource most commonly used. Murphy’s
view is that such relations are not lexical but
“metalexical”—stored not in the mental lexi-
con but at the next level up—because they
are knowledge about words, not of words;
they are not arbitrary, nonderivable infor-
mation for linguistic competence. Moreover,
they are context-dependent.
Murphy thus argues for what she calls a
pragmatic view of semantic relations, which
she bases on her principle of relation by
contrast: “The contrast relation holds among
the members of a set iff they have all the
same contextually relevant properties but
one” (page 44). In defense of this position,
Murphy gives an extensive critique of other
theories of semantic relations, draws on both
linguistic and psycholinguistic evidence to
support her case, and presents in-depth treat-
ments of synonymy and of contrast relations
such as antonymy.
Murphy’s critique of WordNet as static and
context-free is familiar in computational lin-
guistics. But the alternative is not obvious.
One can readily agree with Murphy that se-
mantic relations are context-dependent, but
the problem of actually determining the re-
lations computationally in context is beyond
the current state of the art; Murphy’s anal-
ysis does not include any suggestions for
algorithmic methods for deriving relations.
Moreover, the interaction between seman-
tic relations and context may be two-way:
It can be the relations that construct the
context.
While Murphy’s treatment of semantic re-
lations is not at all computational, her per-
spective and the problems that arise from
her work will be interesting to any re-
searcher of computational problems in lexical
semantics.—Graeme Hirst, University of Toronto
Ellipsis and Reference Tracking
in Japanese
Shigeko Nariyama
(University of Melbourne and Nara Institute
of Science and Technology)
Amsterdam: John Benjamins (Studies in
language companion series, edited by
Werner Abraham and Michael Noonan,
volume 66), 2003, xv+397 pp; hardbound,
ISBN 90-272-3076-5 and 1-58811-420-1,
$150.00, C– 125.00
“There is no grammatical requirement for
nominal arguments, such as subject and ob-
ject, to be overt in Japanese, and they are
frequently unexpressed. . . . The main aim of
this book is to elucidate the linguistic mech-
anisms whereby the referents of unexpressed
arguments are identified. . . . These unex-
pressed arguments, referred to as ‘ellipsis’ in
this book, are formidably prevalent in Japan-
ese. . . . Despite this high frequency of ellip-
sis, Japanese is not equipped with the gram-
matical devices such as cross-referencing sys-
tems and verbal inflections commonly found
in pro-drop languages for referent identifica-
tion, and yet the mechanisms of ellipsis re-
main little explicated in the literature. Hence,
it is the general view in the current literature
that the referential identification of ellipsis is
sought in ‘context’, ‘mutual knowledge’, ‘so-
ciolinguistic variables’, or even ‘intuition’. . . .
“The mechanisms for referential identifica-
tion of ellipted arguments are extremely in-
tricate but by no means as elusive as the com-
monly held view would have it. No matter
how vague or illogical Japanese may look
to non-native speakers of Japanese, since
speakers of Japanese have little trouble com-
municating among themselves, there must
be concrete linguistic mechanisms that
they use to identify the referents of ellipted
arguments. . . . In terms of machine transla-
tion systems from and into Japanese, how-
ever, because machines do not have the fac-
ulty that humans do and cannot rely on in-
527
Briefly Noted
tuition as such, they require explicit proce-
dures for deducing the referents of ellipted
arguments. The major goal of this book is
to provide concrete and precise procedures
that are not only comprehensible to humans
but are also suitable for machine translation
systems. . . . These mechanisms stem from
three tiers of linguistic information: first,
the use of argument-inferring morphemes
on verbal predicates; secondly, tightly con-
strained argument structures which anchor
the subject and which induce patterns of el-
lipsis; and thirdly, cohesively sequenced dis-
course structures with the topicalized subject
as pivot and the distinctions marked by the
use of wa and ga. The interplay among these
three tiers of morphology/semantics, syntax,
and discourse devices is the key to determin-
ing the referential identity of ellipted argu-
ments. I devise an algorithm summing up
these mechanisms, and demonstrate, using
naturally occurring texts, how it can both de-
tect the existence of ellipsis in sentences and
track referential identity.” —Abridged from the
author’s introduction
