115
Briefly Noted
The Turing Test: The Elusive Standard
of Artificial Intelligence
James H. Moor (editor)
(Dartmouth College)
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers
(Studies in cognitive systems, edited by
James H. Fetzer, volume 30), 2003,
ix+273 pp; hardbound, ISBN 1-4020-1204-7,
$99.00, £66.00, C– 103.00
Alan Turing begins his 1950 Mind article,
“Computing Machinery and Intelligence,”
with the following straightforward pro-
nouncement: “I propose to consider the ques-
tion ‘Can machines think?’ ” He quickly (too
quickly?) argues for “replacing” the original
question with another “which is closely re-
lated to it and is expressed in relatively un-
ambiguous words.” (Please note the vague-
ness of the claim; what is not vague is that
it is not a claim of identity.) Turing goes on
to describe the new form of the “problem”
in terms of an “imitation game,” played with
three people, a man A, a woman B, and an in-
terrogator C, who may be of either sex. They
are placed in separate rooms, with the only
form of communication between them be-
ing teleprinter (or, to be au courant, instant-
messenger clients on their desktops). C is
to ask them questions or otherwise engage
them in conversation, with the object of the
game being for C, who knows them only by
the labels X and Y, to determine which of
them is a man and which a woman. Turing
then proceeds to offer his replacement(s) for
the original question:
We now ask the question ‘What will
happen when a machine takes the part
of A in this game?’ Will the interroga-
tor decide wrongly as often when the
game is played like this as he does
when the game is played between a
man and a woman? These questions
replace our original ‘Can machines
think?’
And the rest is history—highly contentious
history. Alas, not much to useful effect is
made of (or added to) this history in the
volume under review, which is a collection
of articles selected from recent issues of two
Kluwer journals, Minds and Machines and
Journal of Logic, Language and Information. A
truly unwarranted amount of space (that is,
much much more than a page) is devoted
to worrying about the relation between the
game as described above and a brief reprise
later in the article. In the interim, Turing has
given the reader a short course in computer
science, that is, an introduction to Turing ma-
chines and, in particular, the idea of a univer-
sal digital machine. He goes on to give what
he clearly intends to be a more precise ren-
dering of his original replacement question:
Let us fix our attention on one partic-
ular digital computer C. Is it true that
by modifying this computer to have
an adequate storage, suitably increas-
ing its speed of action, and providing
it with an appropriate program, C can
be made to play satisfactorily the part
of A in the imitation game, the part of
C being taken by a man?
This is sloppy. Aside from the singularly un-
fortunate choice of constant (wasn’t C the in-
terrogator?), we seem to have lost a player
and now the part of B, the woman in the
drama in the first description, is being played
by a man. What ever happened to her?
Sloppy, yes, but the sloppiness need not
be taken to raise issues about sexual identity
and the central role of deceit in our mental
lives. One of the five sections of the book is
largely given over to much ado about this
particular variety of nothing. (Take my word
for it: It’s enough to make one grind one’s
teeth.)
There are a few worthwhile pieces in
the collection, in particular, characteristically
sober and thoughtful overviews by Jack
Copeland and by the editor. And there is ab-
solutely nothing of interest in the collection
about dialogue or conversation: the medium,
after all, of the imitation game.—David Israel,
SRI International
The contents of the volume are as follows:
1. History
B. Jack Copeland, “The Turing Test”
Ayse Pinar Saygin, Ilyas Cicekli, and Varol
Akman, “Turing Test: 50 Years Later”
2. Interpretation
Susan G. Sterrett, “Turing’s Two Tests for
Intelligence”
Saul Traiger, “Making the Right
Identification in the Turing Test”
Gualtiero Piccinini, “Turing’s Rules for the
Imitation Game”
116
Computational Linguistics Volume 30, Number 1
3. Criticism
Sean Zdenek, “Passing Loebner’s Turing
Test: A Case of Conflicting Discourse
Functions”
Bruce Edmonds, “The Constructibility of
Artificial Intelligence (as Defined by the
Turing Test)”
Edmund M. A. Roland, “Intelligence is
Not Enough: On the Socialization of
Talking Machines”
4. Defense
William J. Rapaport, “How to Pass a Tur-
ing Test”
Larry Hauser, “Look Who’s Moving the
Goal Posts Now”
James H. Moor, “The Status and Future of
the Turing Test”
5. Alternatives
Selmer Bringsjord, Paul Bello, and David
Ferrucci, “Creativity, the Turing Test,
and the Better (Lovelace) Test”
Gerald J. Erion, “The Cartesian Test for
Automatism”
S. Harnad, “Minds, Machines and Turing”
Form and Meaning in Language. Vol-
ume I: Papers on Semantic Roles
Charles J. Fillmore
(University of California, Berkeley)
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications (CSLI
lecture notes, number 121) (distributed by
the University of Chicago Press), 2003,
viii+311 pp; hardbound, ISBN 1-57586-285-9,
$70.00, £49.00; paperbound, ISBN
1-57586-286-7, $25.00, £17.50
The linguistic theories of Charles Fillmore,
developed in the 1960s in reaction to Chom-
skian generative grammar, have had a pro-
found influence on computational linguistics
that is felt to this day. His so-called case
grammars were a precursor of frame-based
semantic representations and of contempo-
rary approaches to semantic roles. This vol-
ume republishes seven of Fillmore’s impor-
tant papers from 1968 to 1978, including the
seminal “Case for Case” (1968) and “The
Case for Case Reopened” (1977).—G.H.
Modes of Discourse: The Local Struc-
ture of Texts
Carlota S. Smith
(University of Texas)
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
(Cambridge studies in linguistics, volume
103), 2003, xiv+320 pp; hardbound, ISBN
0-521-78169-8, $70.00
“This book is a partial answer to the ques-
tion: what can close linguistic analysis bring
to the understanding of discourse? Discourse
studies have focused on pragmatic factors
such as genre expectations, discourse coher-
ence relations, and inference. In part, this
has been a natural reaction to earlier, rather
unsuccessful attempts to apply the tech-
niques of linguistic analysis beyond the sen-
tence. . . . I attempt to find the right balance
here, at least in part. I propose a local level
of discourse, the Discourse Mode, which
has linguistic properties and discourse mean-
ing. I posit five modes: Narrative, Report,
Descriptive, Information, and Argument.”—
From the author’s introduction
