Briefly Noted
Speech and Human–Machine Dialog
Wolfgang Minker and Samir Bennacef
(University of Ulm and Vecsys)
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers
(Kluwer international series in engineering
and computer science), 2004, ix+93 pp
[originally published in French as Parole et
dialogue homme-machine, Editions Eyrolles/
CNRS Editions, 2001]; hardbound,
ISBN 1-4020-8036-0, $95.00, £61.00, C87.00;
e-book, ISBN 1-4020-8037-9, $95.00, 61.00,
C87.00
Two long-standing research goals in natural
language processing are (1) to develop effec-
tive natural language interfaces to databases
and (2) to develop theories about the con-
struction of such systems that generalize be-
yond any one system’s application domain.
This book is a brief (93 pages!) presentation
of one such theory within the context of
human–machine spoken dialog.
After describing the authors’ approach to
natural language understanding via the use
of semantic case grammars for parsing
phrases within a spoken utterance, the book
provides an overview of the different types
of modeling needed for spoken dialog. The
authors properly make a distinction between
task and dialog in modeling while noting
how the two are frequently blurred together
for pragmatic reasons. In regards to dialog
modeling, which is the core topic of the book,
they distinguish among three classes of mod-
els: (1) structural models, (2) plan-oriented
models, and (3) logic models. The bulk of
the presentation is on structural models re-
presented as dialog grammars, but unfortu-
nately the authors’ critique of the various
types of models is rather superficial.
The authors then present a description of
their dialog model for information-request
dialogs. Their model is based on an analy-
sis of multiple corpora, both spoken and
written, that primarily emphasize travel in-
formation of various types. The model is
presented as a dialog grammar (i.e., it is a
structural model), and a brief description
of a system architecture and algorithms for
task execution and the dialog manager are
provided.
While the topic under discussion and the
approach taken by the authors is of interest,
the overall presentation is unsatisfying for
various reasons. Besides the lack of a serious
analysis of the trade-offs among the various
types of dialog models, the critique and
justification of their own model through a
careful evaluation is unfortunately also lack-
ing. The authors do present an annotation
of a complete 15-utterance dialog from one
of their corpora, but that is inadequate to
enable a reader to come to an informed
judgment about the scientific validity of the
proposed model.
In conclusion, given its excessive brevity
on key issues, its cost ($95), the fact that it
is a translation from a French version of the
book published in 2001, and the fact that the
results from the book have apparently never
appeared in any type of journal publication,
I cannot justify recommending this book
for personal ownership. It might be helpful
as a quick introduction to dialog modeling,
particularly in regards to grammatical ap-
proaches, but that’s about it.—Ronnie W.
Smith, East Carolina University

