Argumentation Machines: New Frontiers in Argumentation
and Computation
Chris Reed and Timothy J. Norman (editors)
(University of Dundee and University of Aberdeen)
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers
(Argumentation library, edited by
Frans H. van Eemeren et al., volume 9), 2004,
xxv+240 pp; hardbound, ISBN 1-4020-1811-8,
$114.00, C104.00, U72.00
Reviewed by
Ingrid Zukerman
Monash University
Argumentation may be defined as the study of different aspects of (human)
interactions whose objective is to reach a conclusion about the truth of a proposition
or the adoption of a course of action. The aspects in question include the argu-
mentation interaction, which is typically a dialogue; the construction and presenta-
tion of arguments for or against a proposition; the interpretation of arguments; the
knowledge representation required to build and interpret arguments; theory of rhet-
oric; and applications such as agent negotiation, legal argument, and decision-support
systems.
Argumentation is a rich interdisciplinary area of study, which so far has largely
been considered separately by practitioners in different fields. To address this
problem, Reed and Norman brought together researchers in argumentation, artificial
intelligence, law, linguistics, and philosophy, with the aim of writing a book about
argumentation that would foster interdisciplinary work (see the book’s Preface).
The book comprises six chapters, each written by a different group of people,
which cover diverse areas where argumentation has computational implications.
Chapter 1 introduces the book. Chapters 2–4 consider argumentation in the context of
multiagent, decision-support, and legal systems, focusing on rhetorical and repre-
sentational issues that need to be taken into account when implementing such sys-
tems. Chapters 5 and 6 address computational aspects of the implementation of
argumentation systems. As indicated in its Preface, the book distances itself from
logical approaches to argumentation, and instead focuses on natural language
interactions and conversational scenarios. The six chapters of the book are outlined
below.
‘‘A Roadmap of Research in Argument and Computation,’’ by Reed and Norman,
motivates the subsequent chapters and provides background on three main areas of
research that are relevant to these chapters: artificial intelligence, rhetoric, and
multiagent systems. The discussion is supported by an extensive list of references
(although there are some omissions).
In ‘‘Argument and Multi-agent Systems,’’ by Norman, Carbogim, Krabbe, and
Walton, the authors address issues at the intersection of argumentation and multiagent
systems. The discussion starts by contrasting argumentation theory with agent
communication along two main dimensions: dialogue-structure/interaction-protocols,
and beliefs/commitments. The chapter then proceeds to describe different types of
dialogue, argument schemas (Walton 1996), and models of agent dialogue. A recurrent
theme is the argument in favor of commitment-based agent communication instead of
belief-based communication.
‘‘Decision Support for Practical Reasoning,’’ by Girle, Hitchcock, McBurney, and
Verheij, explores the application of argumentation to practical reasoning systems,
proposing a theoretical basis for the design of decision-support systems. The chapter
covers several aspects of decision-support systems from an argumentation perspec-
tive: argument schemas, decision calculi, reasoning under resource constraints, moral
considerations, and deliberation dialogues. It also discusses the design of interfaces
and the evaluation of decision-support systems.
‘‘Computational Models, Argumentation Theories, and Legal Practice,’’ by Bench-
Capon, Freeman, Hohmann, and Prakken, examines the contribution of computational
models and argumentation theories to legal practice. The chapter uses a detailed legal
case study to introduce the stages of legal argumentation. It then discusses how
argumentation theory contributes to legal argument, and how AI-and-law systems
have implemented the different stages of legal argumentation. Particularly noteworthy
is the detailed grid that shows the argumentation processes that have been
implemented in existing AI-and-law systems.
‘‘The Persuasion Machine,’’ by Gilbert, Grasso, Groarke, Gurr, and Gerlofs,
explores the problems and challenges of building a persuasion machine. The main
features of the Persuasion Machine described here are its use of argument schemata
and its distinction between the logical and rhetorical facets of persuasion. The chapter
describes in some detail each step of the argumentation process, focusing on the main
components of the machine: the Argument Engine, which analyzes a user’s arguments
and constructs its own arguments, and the User Image, which represents a user’s
norms, values, attitudes, and beliefs.
‘‘Computational Models of Rhetorical Argument,’’ by Crosswhite, Fox, Reed,
Scaltsas, and Stumpf, uses theories of rhetoric, computational linguistics, and
knowledge representation to build a computational model of rhetoric. The chapter’s
main drivers are the use of rhetorical argument schemata (Das et al. 1997), the central
placement of audiences in the argumentation process (Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca
1969), and the role and purpose of a system in a given scenario. Of particular interest is
the discussion about contextualized knowledge and the formal model developed by
McCarthy and Buvac? (1998) as a basis for a computational model of rhetoric.
As indicated in its Preface, this book was written in the space of a week, and as
such, it is a tremendous achievement. However, its framework may be responsible for
a certain ‘‘lack of consensus,’’ in the sense that the chapters are quite independent, and
there isn’t a clear formulation of the fundamental advances in the field. Thus,
argument schemas, which are such an advance and pervade the entire book, are briefly
reintroduced in every chapter, instead of being presented in one authoritative chapter.
Likewise, the last two chapters are similar in their attempt to operationalize the
argumentation process, but present different approaches without cross-referencing.
This book is aimed at diverse audiences, which include argumentation theorists,
computational linguists, AI researchers, and law researchers. From the perspective of
AI and computational linguistics, I found that the book provides a good coverage of
qualitative-reasoning approaches to argumentation. However, it either dismisses or
ignores quantitative and probabilistic approaches. Specifically, chapter 3 gives a
somewhat ill-advised critique of decision calculi in the context of decision-support
systems, and fails to mention anytime algorithms (Dean and Boddy 1988) in the con-
text of reasoning under resource constraints. Probabilistic reasoning as a way of com-
bining and weighing alternatives is mentioned only once in the book. Worse yet, the
154
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 1
155
field of user modeling is ignored: The authors coined the term ‘‘user image’’ to
represent what most of us know as a user model (Kobsa and Wahlster 1989).
From a methodological point of view, an underlying assumption seems to be that
rule-based and qualitative reasoning should be used for selecting among alternatives
at each stage of the argumentation process. In addition, as stated above, the book
focuses on a schema-based approach to argumentation, as a counterpoint to previous
work, which has focused on ‘‘structural components of argumentation in a highly
logical style’’ (chapter 1). Clearly, the study of schema-based argumentation is a
worthwhile endeavor. However, it would have been better if the book had, at least in
part, considered a combination of these approaches, rather than swinging completely
to the ‘‘rhetorical approach only’’ side.
Despite these criticisms, I believe that this book represents a generally useful,
although somewhat biased, account of the field of argumentation. As an AI and
computational linguistics researcher, I found the argumentation perspective on
multiagent, decision-support, and legal systems particularly illuminating, as well as
the discussion on contextual knowledge. Also, an appealing feature of the book is its
consideration of research issues, with most of the chapters including a rather detailed
section on future areas of research.
I would recommend this book to graduate students or researchers who intend to
work in argumentation. However, at the same time, I would suggest reading the book
critically and complementing it with material about quantitative and probabilistic
methods and user modeling.
Ingrid Zukerman is an associate professor in computer science at Monash University, Melbourne,
Australia. Her areas of interest are discourse planning, argumentation, plan recognition,
question answering, and agent modeling. Zukerman’s address is School of Computer Science
and Software Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Vic 3800, Australia; e-mail: Ingrid.
Zukerman@infotech.monash.edu.au.
References
Das, Subrata Kumar, John Fox, D. Elsdon,
and Peter Hammond. 1997. A flexible
architecture for autonomous agents. Journal
of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial
Intelligence, 9:407–440.
Dean, Thomas and Mark S. Boddy. 1988.
An analysis of time-dependent planning.
In AAAI-88: Proceedings of the Seventh
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 49–54, St. Paul, MN.
Kobsa, Alfred and Wolfgang Wahlster,
editors. 1989. User Models in Dialog Systems.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
McCarthy, John and Sas?a Buvac?. 1998.
Formalizing context (expanded notes).
In Atocha Aliseda, Rob van Glabbeek,
and Dag Westersta?hl, editors, Computing
Natural Language. CSLI Publications,
Stanford, CA, pages 13–50.
Perelman, Chaim and Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca.
1969. The New Rhetoric: A Treatise on
Argumentation. University of Notre Dame
Press, Notre Dame, IN.
Walton, Douglas. 1996. Argument Structure:
A Pragmatic Theory. University of Toronto
Press.
Book Reviews

