Briefly Noted
Memory-Based Parsing
Sandra Ku¨bler
(University of Tu¨bingen)
Amsterdam: John Benjamins (Natural
language processing series, edited by
Ruslan Mitkov, volume 7), 2004,
viii+294 pp; hardbound, ISBN 90-272-4991-1,
$138.00, and 1-58811-590-9, €115.00
This monograph, based on Sandra Ku¨bler’s
Ph.D. thesis, introduces the reader to research
at the intersection of data-driven parsing and
memory-based learning. Compared to other
approaches to parsing, including knowledge-
based methods, memory-based parsing takes
the provocative standpoint that new struc-
tures can be parsed by analogical reason-
ing over stored structures, rather than by
abstracted rules. All that the approach needs
is parsed example sentences stored in mem-
ory and a similarity function to find candidate
nearest-neighbor sentences that can act as the
basis for the analogical-reasoning step.
Ku¨bler begins with a walk past the known
approaches in the field to partial and full
memory-based parsing. As for partial parsing
(constituent chunking and basic grammatical-
relation assignment such as subject-verb re-
lations), the work of Daelemans, Veenstra,
Buchholz, Tjong Kim Sang, and others using
memory-based learning is summarized, as
well as Krymolowski, Argamon, and Dagan’s
work on memory-based sequence learning.
Ku¨bler then proceeds to review Streiter,
whose memory-based parser is an example of
a more holistic, sentence-oriented approach
which, in contrast to the aforementioned
approaches, needs a more complex similar-
ity metric to compute the distance between
a complete new sentence and stored parsed
sentences. A separate chapter is devoted to
data-oriented parsing, which uses probabi-
listic machinery and extensive back-off from
larger to smaller substructures, instead of
a single similarity function; in particular,
two nonprobabilistic variants by Bod and
De Pauw are close cousins of the other
memory-based approaches.
The heart of the book is the Tu¨SBL (Tu¨bing-
en Similarity-Based Learning) memory-based
parser, which implements a similarity-based
approach that, analogous to Streiter’s ap-
proach, attempts to fully parse complete sen-
tences by analogy, as rapidly as possible.
Ku¨bler’s solution is original. While a naive
approach based on a similarity between full
sentences would be able to correctly parse
only a few sentences very close to sentences
in memory, Ku¨bler introduces at least two
smart generalization enhancements. One is
that the Tu¨SBL parser has more than one sim-
ilarity metric. When a new sentence is parsed,
it is first analyzed at the levels of part-of-
speech tags and base constituents. If no reli-
able nearest neighbors matching on the word
level can be found in memory, the other levels
act as back-offs on which to measure similar-
ity. The second enhancement is that the search
for nearest neighbors is extended by allowing
them to have a word or constituent too many
or too few or to be longer but contain a good
matching subtree. Tu¨SBL’s similarity metric,
or rather its case-based reasoning function, is
actually aware of the internal structure of the
nearest-neighbor trees and the partial syntac-
tic structure of new sentences.
Tu¨SBL is put to the test on the NEGRA-
formatted Tu¨Ba-DS treebank of spontaneous
speech in specific domains (hotel reser-
vations, business appointments, and travel
scheduling), gathered in the context of the
VERBMOBIL project. Ku¨bler makes the cred-
ible point that data of this type offer a
more interesting challenge to parsing meth-
ods than nonspontaneous, professionally au-
thored texts in a (similarly) closed domain,
such as the Wall Street Journal Penn Treebank.
An excellent point is made on the limita-
tions of the standard PARSEVAL evaluation’s
focus on syntactic chunking and labeling;
arguably, the correctness of the parser in
assigning functional labels to grammatical re-
lations is at least as interesting as an eval-
uation metric. From the reported results we
learn that Tu¨SBL does a good job; it attains a
PARSEVAL F-score of about 85 on the spon-
taneous speech corpus. We also learn that
the back-off part of Tu¨SBL performs as well
as the whole Tu¨SBL system in PARSEVAL
terms. This underlines the point that parsing
based on matching on smaller, local struc-
tures, as is done by most other memory-based
methods, performs at least on par with more
holistic methods. However, Tu¨SBL’s holistic
memory-based core is more reliable in as-
signing correct functional tags to correctly
identified grammatical relations.
419
Computational Linguistics Volume 31, Number 3
In sum, the book offers a comprehensive
and well-illustrated overview of the area
of memory-based parsing, makes all the
right methodological points, and describes
a system that performs a complex task in a
refreshingly simple and smart way.—Antal
van den Bosch, Tilburg University
Computational Linguistics and Beyond
Chu-Ren Huang and
Winfried Lenders (editors)
(Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica,
and University of Bonn)
Taipei: Institute of Linguistics, Academia
Sinica (Language and linguistics monograph
series B, Frontiers in linguistics I), 2004,
viii+207 pp; paperbound, ISBN 957-01-7610-5
This volume consists of the plenary lectures
and two workshop panels from the 19th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (Taipei, 2002), complementing the
already-published conference proceedings.
The contents of the volume are as follows:
“Computational Linguistics and Beyond:
An Introduction,” by Chu-Ren Huang
and Winfried Lenders
“FrameNet and Representing the Link
between Semantic and Syntactic
Relations,” by Charles J. Fillmore, Josef
Ruppenhofer, and Collin F. Baker
“Computational Studies of Language
Evolution,” by William S.-Y. Yang,
Jinyun Ke, and James W. Minett
“New Chances for Deep Linguistic
Processing,” by Hans Uszkoreit
“The Roles of Natural Language and
XML in the Semantic Web,” by
Graham Wilcock, Paul Buitelaar,
Antonio Pareja-Lora, Barrett Bryant,
Jimmy Lin, and Nancy Ide
“Chinese Language Processing at
the Dawn of the 21st Century,” by
Benjamin K. T’sou
Anaphora Processing: Linguistic,
Cognitive, and Computational
Modelling
Anto´nio Branco, Tony McEnery,
and Ruslan Mitkov (editors)
(Universidade de Lisboa, Lancaster
University, and University
of Wolverhampton)
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John
Benjamins (Current studies in linguistic
theory), 2005, x+449 pp; hardbound, ISBN
90-272-4777-3 and 1-58811-621-2, €120.00,
$144.00
This volume contains revised and extended
versions of 20 papers chosen from among
those presented at the 2002 Discourse Anaph-
ora and Anaphora Resolution Colloquium in
Lisbon.
The contents of the volume are as follows:
“A Sequenced Model of Anaphora and
Ellipsis Resolution,” by Shalom Lappin
“How to Deal with Wicked Anaphora,” by
Dan Cristea and Oana-Diana Postolache
“A Machine Learning Approach to
Preference Strategies for Anaphor
Resolution,” by Roland Stuckardt
“Decomposing Discourse,” by Joel Tetreault
“A Lightweight Approach to Coreference
Resolution for Named Entities in Text,”
by Marin Dimitrov, Kalina Bontcheva,
Hamish Cunningham, and Diana Maynard
“A Unified Treatment of Spanish se,” by
Randy Sharp
“Binding and Beyond: Issues in Backward
Anaphora,” by Eric Reuland and Sergey
Avrutin
“Modelling Referential Choice in Discourse:
A Cognitive Calculative Approach and a
Neural Network Approach,” by Andre´
Gru¨ning and Andrej A. Kibrik
“Degrees of Indirectness: Two Types of
Implicit Referents and Their Retrieval
via Unaccounted Pronouns,” by Francis
Cornish
“Pronominal Interpretation and the
Syntax-Discourse Interface: Real-Time
Comprehension and Neurological
Properties,” by Maria Mercedes Pin˜ango
and Petra Burkhardt
“Top-Down and Bottom-Up Effects on
the Interpretation of Weak Object
Pronouns in Greek,” by Stavroula-Thaleia
Kousta
“Different Forms Have Different Referential
Properties: Implications for the Notion of
‘Salience,’” by Elsi Kaiser
420
Briefly Noted
“Referential Accessibility and Anaphor
Resolution: The Case of the French Hybrid
Demonstrative Pronoun celui-ci/celle-ci,” by
Marion Fossard and Franc¸ois Rigalleau
“The Predicate-Argument Structure of
Discourse Connectives: A Corpus-Based
Study,” by Cassandre Creswell, Katherin
Forbes, Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi Prasad,
Aravind Joshi, and Bonnie Webber
“Combining Centering-Based Models of
Salience and Information Structure for
Resolving Intersentential Pronominal
Anaphora,” by Costanza Navarretta
“Pronouns without NP Antecedents: How
Do We Know When a Pronoun Is
Referential?” by Jeanette Gundel, Nancy
Hedberg, and Ron Zacharski
“Syntactic Form and Discourse
Accessibility,” by Gregory Ward and
Andrew Kehler
“Coreference and Anaphoric Relations
of Demonstrative Noun Phrases in
Multilingual Corpus,” by Renata Vieira,
Susanne Salmon-Alt, and Caroline
Gasperin
“Anaphoric Demonstratives: Dealing with
the Hard Cases,” by Marco Rocha
“Focus, Activation, and This-Noun Phrases:
An Empirical Study,” by Massimo Poesio
and Natalia N. Modjeska
421

