Geometry and Meaning
Dominic Widdows
(MAYA Design)
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications (CSLI lecture notes, number 172), 2004,
xxii+319 pp; hardbound, ISBN 1-57586-447-9, $70.00; paperbound,
ISBN 1-57586-448-7, $25.00, £17.50
Reviewed by
C.J. “Keith” van Rijsbergen
University of Glasgow
Let no man enter here who is ignorant of geometry.
—Plato
Geometry and Meaning is an interesting book about a relationship between geometry
and logic defined on certain types of abstract spaces and how that intimate relation-
ship might be exploited when applied in computational linguistics. It is also about an
approach to information retrieval, because the analysis of natural language, especially
negation, is applied to problems in IR, and indeed illustrated throughout the book by
simple examples using search engines. It is refreshing to see IR issues tackled from a
different point of view than the standard vector space (Salton, 1968). It is an enjoyable
read, as intended by the author, and succeeds as a sort of tourist guide to the subject
in hand.
The early part of the book concentrates on the introduction of a number of elemen-
tary concepts from mathematics: graph theory, linear algebra (especially vector spaces),
lattice theory, and logic. These concepts are well motivated and illustrated with good
examples, mostly of a classificatory or taxonomic kind. One of the major goals of the
book is to argue that non-classical logic, in the form of a quantum logic, is a candidate
for analyzing language and its underlying logic, with a promise that such an approach
could lead to improved search engines. The argument for this is aided by copious
references to early philosophers, scientists, and mathematicians, creating the impression
that when Aristotle, Descartes, Boole, and Grassmann were laying the foundations for
taxonomy, analytical geometry, logic, and vector spaces, they had a more flexible and
broader view of these subjects than is current. This is especially true of logic. Thus the
historical approach taken to introducing quantum logic (chapter 7) is to show that this
particular kind of logic and its interpretation in vector space were inherent in some of
the ideas of these earlier thinkers.
Widdows claims that Aristotle was never respected for his mathematics and that
Grassmann’s Ausdehnungslehre was largely ignored and left in obscurity. Whether
Aristotle was never admired for his mathematics I am unable to judge, but certainly
Alfred North Whitehead (1925) was not complimentary when he said:
The popularity of Aristotelian Logic retarded the advance of physical science throughout the
Middle Ages. If only the schoolmen had measured instead of classifying, how much they might
have learnt! (page 41)
Computational Linguistics Volume 32, Number 1
On the other hand, Grassmann was recognized for his foundational work on analytical
geometry; for example, Hermann Weyl (1949) comments:
Today probably the best approach to analytic geometry is by means of the vector concept,
following the procedure of Grassmann’s Ausdehnungslehre. (page 68)
Weyl of course contributed extensively to quantum mechanics and already then held
the view that “classical logic does not fit in with quantum physics and is to be replaced
by a kind of ‘quantum logic’ ” (page 263). More recently Suppes et al. (1989) refer to
Grassmann’s ground-breaking work on geometrical structures, which are now called
Grassmann Structures. I think the case for Grassmann’s obscurity is unproven.
Chapters 1–6 are really an elementary introduction for those without much exper-
tise in mathematics and logic to prepare them for the novel work presented on quantum
logic and concept lattices in Chapters 7 and 8 (but see Courant and Robbins [1941] and
Marciszewski [1981] for further introductory material). The elementary concepts are
well illustrated with examples from search engines and with problems of ambiguity
of words. The “killer application” for quantum logic in chapter 7 is the modeling of
negation, and in chapter 8 the interpretation of taxonomic structures as non-Boolean
lattices. In both cases the applications are convincing. The basis for the representation
in quantum logic is the lattice of subspaces of a vector space endowed with a geometry
which determines a logic (Birkhoff and von Neumann 1936). It is a pity that Widdows
did not complete the story, which was started by Birkhoff and von Neumann, and
introduce the probability measure on this lattice of subspaces. One of the striking results
in quantum theory is that this can be done consistently and uniquely (Gleason 1957).
Von Neumann was well aware of this although he could not prove it; in 1954, he said:
In other words, probability corresponds precisely to introducing the angles geometrically. Fur-
thermore, there is only one way to introduce it. The more so because in the quantum mechanical
machinery the negation of a statement, so the negation of a statement which is represented
by a linear set of vectors, corresponds to the orthogonal complement of this linear space. (von
Neumann, 1954, reproduced in Re´dei and Sto¨lzner 2001, page 244)
Had probability been introduced, and therefore the role of measurement, it would
have helped explain the somewhat tantalizing expression on page 238: “It follows
that every ‘experimental proposition’ in a quantum mechanical system corresponds
to a subspace of the vector space in which the states of the system are represented
mathematically.” It is curious that in the entire book, probability is mentioned only
twice in passing. Returning to Whitehead and his beef about Aristotle, when he com-
plains about Aristotle not “measuring,” one needs to take this seriously because the
machinery of quantum mechanics and its observables only makes sense when one con-
siders the observation of attributes with a probability of success or failure. Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle, one of the foundation stones of quantum mechanics, was about
observables and their probabilistic interaction. A quantum logic without a theory of
observation (or interaction) is somewhat empty. Readers might like to pursue this line of
reasoning by consulting Beltrametti and Cassinelli (1981), one of the seminal works on
quantum logic.
Each of Widdows’ chapters ends with a delightful and useful “Wider Reading”
section encouraging the reader to explore further afield; overall, these sections total
15 pages, or about 5% of the book. Below in the appendix to this review, I add a few
references that complement some of Widdows’.
156
Book Reviews
In his foreword to the book, Pentti Kanerva suggests that the substance of the
book is “the exploration of mathematics that would be appropriate for describing
concepts and meaning.” For this reviewer, this is only part of the story; the book goes
beyond exploration and applies the relevant mathematics to computational problems in
linguistics and information retrieval. It may be the first steps along the way to recasting
some old problems in terms of some new mathematics.
Appendix: Wider Reading
Possibly the most outstanding reference to numerical taxonomy is Sneath and Sokal
(1973). For a more up-to-date and appropriate reference to information retrieval, I
would propose Belew (2000). The use and application of non-classical logic in IR is
well covered by Crestani et al (1998). An extremely relevant set of papers on quantum
logic, in that they deal with taxonomy and various conditionals — for example, the
Stalnaker conditional — are the papers by Hardegree, especially Hardegree (1976).
His 1982 paper on natural kinds covers similar territory to Widdows’ discussion on
“extent” and “intent” and its mathematical duality. An excellent source for papers on
developments in quantum logic is Beltrametti and van Fraassen (1981). A critical view
of the quantum logic enterprise is Gibbins (1987). To plug the gap on measurement in
quantum mechanics one can do no better than Wheeler and Zurek (1983).
Although Widdows does an excellent job of introducing most of the elementary
concepts needed in his book, there is room for some more guidance on where to go next.
An excellent introduction to the broad field of mathematics, each chapter written by
one of the masters of the field, is Newman (1988). More specifically, good introductions
to the foundations of vector spaces can be found in Halmos (1958), and Isham (1989).
Finally, it may be worth pointing out that the late Jon Barwise, who also worked at
CSLI, introduced quantum logic as part of his work on information flow (Barwise and
Seligman 1997).
References
Barwise, J. and J. Seligman (1997). Information
Flow: The Logic of Distributed Systems.
Cambridge University Press.
Belew, R. 2000. Finding Out About:
A Cognitive Perspective on Search Engine
Technology and the WWW. Cambridge
University Press.
Beltrametti, E. G. and G. Cassinelli. 1981. The
Logic of Quantum Mechanics. Addison-
Wesley Publishing Company, London.
Beltrametti, E. G. and B. C. van Fraassen,
Eds. 1981. Current Issues in Quantum Logic.
Plenum Press, New York.
Birkhoff, G. and J. von Neumann. 1936. The
logic of quantum mechanics. Annals of
Mathematics, 37:823–843.
Courant, R. and H. Robbins. 1941. What
is Mathematics? An Elementary Approach
to Ideas and Methods. Oxford University
Press.
Crestani, Fabio, Mounia Lalmas, and C. J.
van Rijsbergen, editors. 1998. Information
Retrieval: Uncertainty and Logics: Advanced
Models for the Representation and Retrieval of
Information. Kluwer, Boston.
Gibbins, P. 1987. Particles and Paradoxes: The
Limits of Quantum Logic. Cambridge
University Press.
Gleason, A. M. 1957. Measures on the closed
subspaces of a Hilbert space. Journal of
Mathematics and Mechanics, 6:885–893.
Halmos, P. R. 1958. Finite-Dimensional Vector
Spaces. D. van Nostrand Company, Inc.
Hardegree, G. M. 1976. The conditional in
quantum logic. In Patrick Suppes, editor,
Logic and Probability in Quantum Mechanics,
D. Reidel Publishing Company,
pages 55–72.
Hardegree, G. M. 1982. An approach to the
logic of natural kinds. Pacific Philosophical
Quarterly, 63:122–132.
Isham, C. J. 1989. Lectures on Groups and
Vector Spaces for Physicists. World Scientific,
Singapore.
Marciszewski, W., editor. 1981. Dictionary of
Logic — As Applied in the Study of Language.
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
157
Computational Linguistics Volume 32, Number 1
Newman, J. R., ed. 1988. The World of
Mathematics: A Small Library of the
Literature of Mathematics from A’h-mose´ the
Scribe to Albert Einstein. Tempus Books,
Redmond.
Re´dei, M. and M. Sto¨ltzner, eds. 2001.
John von Neumann and the Foundations
of Quantum Physics. Vienna Circle
Institute Yearbook, Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Salton, Gerard. 1968. Automatic Information
Organization and Retrieval. McGraw-Hill.
Sneath, P. H. A. and R. R. Sokal. 1973.
Numerical Taxonomy. W. H. Freeman and
Company, San Francisco.
Suppes, Patrick., David H. Krantz, R.
Duncan Luce, and Amos Tversky.
1989. Foundations of Measurement,
Vol. II: Geometrical, Threshold, and
Probability Representations. Academic
Press, San Diego.
Weyl, Hermann. 1949. Philosophy of
Mathematics and Natural Science.
Princeton University Press.
Wheeler, J. A. and W. H. Zurek, editors.
1983. Quantum Theory and Measurement.
Princeton University Press.
Whitehead, Alfred North. 1926. Science
and the Modern World. Cambridge
University Press.
Keith van Rijsbergen is the author of a recent book, The Geometry of Information Retrieval (Cambridge
University Press, 2004), which introduces some of the mathematics used in quantum theory, such
as Hilbert space, quantum probability, and logic, to recast some of the fundamental problems in
IR. He has published extensively in the field of information retrieval. Van Rijsbergen’s address
is Dept. of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, 17 Lilybank Gardens, Glasgow G12 8QQ,
Scotland; e-mail: keith@dcs.gla.ac.uk.
158
